{"sections":[{"heading":"Title and Author","content":["In style, diction, and content, 1 John follows the fourth gospel closely. It is almost certainly by the same author (see Introduction to John: Author). Despite the fact that 1 John does not identify its author explicitly and the fact that many scholars believe the gospel of John does not identify its author either, the traditional assignment of these books to John the son of Zebedee cannot be disproved. It rests on firmer evidence than more speculative proposals of other authors, such as John the Elder or John Mark. The emphasis in 1:1 on authoritative proclamation and eyewitness testimony is most naturally seen as a reflection of John’s apostolic calling (cf. John 19:35; 20:3–8; 21:24)."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["First John was written to warn and instruct the readers about false teaching (2:26; 3:7) that denied Jesus Christ had come in the flesh (4:2, 3). This teaching held that Christ only appeared to be human, so that there was no real incarnation and no divine Savior who was able to die as an atonement for sinners. Christ only seemed to die. There is much speculation about precisely who these false teachers were, but the letter does not offer much information about them. The false teaching of 1 John is generally known from early Christian history and is called “Docetism” (from the Gk. dokeō, “to seem” or “to appear”).","Some scholars think that the false teaching was a variety of Gnosticism, a religious movement that connected salvation with an experience of individual, esoteric revelation (from the Gk. gnōsis, “knowledge”). An example would be the teaching of the late-first-century teacher Cerinthus. Later writers regarded Cerinthus as both Gnostic and Docetic, but there is little in 1 John to connect the false teaching opposed there with the specific ideas attributed to Cerinthus, or even to Gnosticism more generally.","Several considerations indicate that 1 John was written after the gospel of John. First, it refers very briefly to ideas that the gospel unfolds much more clearly and fully. Apparently the original audience is presumed to have knowledge of the gospel. Second, the conflict with Docetism is absent from the gospel and appears to be a later development. Third, there is no hint in 1 John of the ideological conflict with “the Jews” that pervades the first half of the gospel. The gospel shows the Christian community painfully distinguishing itself from the Jewish people, while 1 John reflects a later time, when Christian self-identification was well established and could be presupposed.","Another indication for the date of 1 John comes from comparison with the letters of Ignatius and Polycarp that are to be dated no earlier than c. 110 A.D. These writings criticize false teachings similar to but more developed than those addressed in 1 John. To accommodate this development, 1 John should be dated some years earlier than 110 and likely at some point in the 90s."]},{"heading":"Genre and Literary Features","content":["Although 1 John has traditionally been regarded as a letter, it lacks key distinguishing features of a letter (salutation, introductory greeting, final greeting; see “Introduction to the Epistles”). On the other hand, John addresses his readers as “my little children” (2:1). He seems to be writing to a specific group of people with whom he has a close relationship. In its basic purposes of admonition and instruction, 1 John is similar to most of the NT letters, though it is not a typical letter. Since there is no specific beginning address to a particular church or final farewell to particular people in a church, some scholars believe that 1 John may be a circular epistle that was intended for several churches.","The letter is notoriously difficult to outline, since unlike the structure of Paul’s letters, there appears to be no linear argument. There is a repetition of discussions or arguments to which the author returns. The only semblance of structure appears to be a circular or conical kind of movement throughout. It may be a type of rhetoric known in the ancient world that repeatedly amplified themes laid out in the beginning of the writing.","Another interesting feature of 1 John is its use of John’s gospel, which likely had been written earlier in the 80s or early 90s A.D., or perhaps even earlier. In fact, John’s gospel can be a key to understanding some of the issues in 1 John. For example, there is some debate about whether John makes a distinction throughout the letter between true spiritual believers (close to God) and true believers who are misguided (and not so close to God) or between true believers and pseudo-believers. First John uses terms such as light and darkness, truth and lie, and love and hate to make the distinction, terms that the gospel of John uses to distinguish true believers in the God of Israel (Jesus’ followers) from pseudo-believers in the God of Israel (the unbelieving Jewish leaders).","There is also a relationship between 1 John and 2 and 3 John. There are some common themes, though each letter has its own unique features. If, as is most likely, the same author is responsible for all three letters, it seems plausible that 1 John was written first, followed by 2 John and then 3 John."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["One of the recurring themes of 1 John is assurance. John seeks to reassure his readers that they are Christians, and he provides them with a number of ways in which they can know that they are believers. His method of assurance involves proceeding through a variety of contrasts. He contrasts those who walk in the light with those who walk in the darkness (1:6, 7), those who say they have no sin with those who confess their sin (1:8–10). He contrasts those who keep God’s commandments with those who do not (2:3–6), and those who love their brother with those who hate their brother (2:9–11; 3:11–15). He contrasts those who love the world with those who do not (2:15–17). He contrasts those who practice righteousness with those who practice sin (3:1–10). John contrasts those who love with those who do not love (4:7–12). Finally, he contrasts those who believe God and those who do not believe, those who have the Son and those who do not (5:10–12).","By means of contrast, John also explains how believers will be able to discern false teachers, or “antichrists.” Antichrists are those who “went out from us” in contrast to those who did not (2:18, 19). They went out “that it might become plain that they are not of us” (v. 19). The “antichrists” are those who deny “that Jesus is the Christ” (v. 22) in contrast with those who “confess” the Son (v. 23). The antichrists are also identified as those who do not confess that Jesus Christ “has come in the flesh” in contrast with those who do (4:2, 3). Interspersed throughout this series of contrasts by means of which John both assures his readers and enables them to exercise discernment is the repeated phrase “by this we know” (2:3; 3:16; 3:24; 4:6, 13; 5:2). His intent is to provide his readers with the doctrinal knowledge they need in order to judge rightly regarding their own faith and the faith of others. The common theme is an echo of Jesus’ words in the Sermon on the Mount: “You will recognize them by their fruits” (Matt. 7:16, 20). His purpose is to encourage them to flee from sin (2:1)","Another primary theme in 1 John is love. It is a particular emphasis in chs. 3 and 4, but it occurs throughout the epistle. In those who keep God’s Word, John says, God’s love is perfected (2:5). Those who abide in the light love their brother (2:10). John insists that love of the Father is inconsistent with love of the world (2:15). Furthermore, we are children of God as a result of His love for us (3:1). Love for one another characterizes Christians and is evidence of the indwelling love of God (3:11–24). We are to love one another because love is from God (4:7). John tells his readers that their love is founded on God’s love. God demonstrated His love for us by sending His Son to be the propitiation for our sins (4:8–10). Because He so loved us, we are to love one another (4:11–12). To abide in love is to abide in God for “God is love” (4:16). Finally, John explains, love of God is inconsistent with hatred of one another. Whoever loves God must also love his brother (4:20, 21)."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["John writes as one who was an eyewitness of the turning point of redemptive history. All of the promises and prophecies of the OT began to be fulfilled with the incarnation of the Son of God, and John was a witness to this incarnation (1:1–3). John’s contrasts between light and darkness recall the creation narrative of Gen. 1. His reference to the children of God (3:1) and the children of the devil (3:10) recall the distinction God makes between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent (Gen. 3:15). John presents the entire Christian life as a continuation of the cosmic spiritual battle that began at the fall and continues until the final judgment. Our enemies in this battle are represented as “antichrists” who deny the incarnation of the Son in the flesh (2:18, 22; 4:3). Although the cosmic battle continues, there is no question about who will win: “The darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining” (2:8, 17). In fact, the decisive victory in the cosmic battle has already been won because the Son of God came “to destroy the works of the devil” (3:8; cf. Heb. 2:14). Christians, then, live between the decisive victory won at the cross and the consummation of that victory, when sin, death, and the devil will be cast away (cf. Rev. 20:10, 14). The consummation has not yet come, but when it does, not only will our external enemies be vanquished, but our internal enemies will be a thing of the past as well. John tells us that on that day, “we shall be like him, because we shall see him as he is” (3:2)."]},{"heading":"Special Issues","content":["While 1 John is simple to read in both Greek and its English translation, its concepts are profound and sometimes hard to understand. Some of the more difficult of these to understand, at least upon first reading, are such concepts as:","1. “Not sinning” (3:6, 9; 5:18). First John 3:6 affirms that the genuine believers do not “keep on sinning.” Verse 9 states, “No one born of God makes a practice of sinning ... and he cannot keep on sinning because he has been born of God” (cf. 5:18). On the surface, these verses appear to say that true Christians should not sin at all.","That John is not making perfectionistic claims in 3:6, 9 is clear from 1:8–10. First, 1:8 says that if people claim not to be in a condition of sin, then they are liars; 1:10 says that if people claim not to have committed actual acts of sin, then they make God a liar. God has said that all are sinners, including Christians, who will not be completely without sin until their final glorification at the end of history. Thus, Christians should “confess their sins” throughout the course of their life (1:9).","In stating that believers do not “keep on sinning” and that they do not “make a practice of sinning” (3:6, 9), John is talking about the general course of a believer’s life. While believers will sin until they are glorified, the bent of their lives is not toward sin; rather, their primary orientation and direction is away from sin and toward God. This is evident in their confession of the true faith, their ongoing life of repentance, their love for other believers, and their progress in personal holiness as they put sin to death in their lives (1:8–10; 4:7, 8; 5:1–12).","2. “Sin that leads to death” (5:16). First John 5:16 says, “there is sin that leads to death.” Some think this refers to a particular sin that true believers can commit, which will lead to their physical but not spiritual death. But commentators do not agree on what type of sin this would be. Furthermore, the first part of 5:16 speaks of praying that God would “give” true believers “life,” which refers either to continuing to maintain the eternal spiritual resurrection life that had begun in them or to give them final, physical resurrection life at the very end of history. The opposite of “eternal life” is eternal “death,” which is likely what is in mind with the “sin that leads to death.” Thus, the sin that leads to death is not a sin that produces physical death but a sin that produces spiritual death—cuts one off from God’s blessed presence.","That the sin that leads to death is one that produces spiritual death is the view of those who believe that the “sin that leads to death” refers to the sin of apostasy (unbelief in the gospel), upon which a true believer would lose his salvation, i.e., spiritually suffer death. Similarly, it could refer to a sin of apostasy that reveals that a professing Christian was never really a Christian at all (2:19). The second option—apostasy that only false professors of faith commit—best fits the teaching of this epistle, since 3:6, 9 affirm that genuine Christians “cannot keep on sinning.” Those who have truly been born of God cannot live a life that is oriented away from the Lord; rather, they will continue to seek Him in faith and repentance. They will not be perfect, but they will keep coming to the Lord such that He will raise them up on the last day (cf. John 6:39, 40, 44). They will not commit the sin of final apostasy.","John does not teach that true believers can lose their salvation, and he does clearly affirm that apostatizing false teachers who profess to believe never had true faith to begin with (cf. 2:19). First John 5:16 speaks of this end-time sin of apostasy, which the elect will not commit but only those who profess faith falsely."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"OF 1 JOHN","reference":""},{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"PROLOGUE: THE ORIGINAL APOSTOLIC MESSAGE CONCERNING ETERNAL LIFE","reference":"1:1–4"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"THE FIRST EXPOSITION OF TRUE SALVIFIC COMMUNION WITH GOD","reference":"1:5–2:27"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Communion with God is demonstrated by acknowledging sin and Christ as the provision for sin","reference":"1:5–2:2"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Genuine faith is discerned by the end-time tests of righteousness and love","reference":"2:3–11"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Genuine faith is discerned by the end-time test of correct belief in Christ in contrast with the world and the antichrists’ view of Christ","reference":"2:12–27"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"THE SECOND EXPOSITION OF TRUE SALVIFIC COMMUNION WITH GOD","reference":"2:28–4:6"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Divine sonship of believers is discerned by the test of righteousness","reference":"2:28–3:10a"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Divine sonship of believers is discerned by the test of love","reference":"3:10b–23"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Divine sonship of believers is discerned by the test of correct belief","reference":"3:23–4:6"},{"level":1,"marker":"IV","text":"THE THIRD EXPOSITION OF TRUE SALVIFIC COMMUNION WITH GOD","reference":"4:7–5:12"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Genuine faith is discerned by a love that comes from God and is rooted in faith","reference":"4:7–21"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Genuine faith is discerned by the test of correct belief, which is the basis of love","reference":"5:1–12"},{"level":1,"marker":"V","text":"EPILOGUE: TO GIVE ASSURANCE TO CHRISTIANS ABOUT THEIR SALVATION","reference":"5:13–21"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"To give assurance to true Christians that eternal life is through Christ","reference":"5:13"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"To give assurance that they have access to the Father through prayer, especially with respect to prayer for others in the Christian community","reference":"5:14–17"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"To give assurance that genuine believers are characterized by righteousness and that they really have a relationship with God and Jesus","reference":"5:17–21"}]}]}
