{"sections":[{"heading":"Title and Author","content":["Second Thessalonians opens with Paul’s identifying himself as the author (1:1; 3:17), and the earliest Christian writers outside of the New Testament, including early second-century figures, such as Ignatius of Antioch, Polycarp, and Justin Martyr, all viewed the epistle as genuinely Pauline. Despite this early attestation, 2 Thessalonians has suffered more frequent attacks on its authenticity than has 1 Thessalonians.","Those who deny that Paul wrote 2 Thessalonians base their claim on several lines of supposed evidence. Some critical scholars, for example, have viewed the similarities between the two letters in subject matter and phrasing as an indication that 2 Thessalonians was not written by Paul but by someone who was self-consciously attempting to imitate the apostle. Of course, such an argument overlooks the simplest and most likely explanation for the similarities between 1 and 2 Thessalonians—the same author, Paul, wrote both epistles.","Some critical scholars have said that the two letters teach contradictory eschatologies (doctrines of the end time and eternal future) and therefore cannot be from the same author. According to these individuals, the first letter teaches an imminent return of Christ, whereas 2 Thessalonians insists that certain intervening events must occur before Christ returns. However, the conflict is illusory and overstated. Nothing definite about the imminence of the second coming of Christ is stated in 1 Thessalonians, which stresses the suddenness and unexpectedness with which the day of the Lord will overtake the unwary. The second letter specifies an order of events so as to counteract a misunderstanding at Thessalonica that the day of the Lord had already arrived, a misunderstanding that became more common among the Thessalonian believers after Paul wrote the first letter. Furthermore, the same two points (suddenness, an order of events) find parallel in Jesus’ own teaching about the future (Matt. 24:14, 42–44). If Jesus could teach that the end will come suddenly and that it will be preceded by a certain series of events, surely Paul could have done so as well.","In 2:5 and 3:10, Paul reminds the Thessalonians of what he had taught while he was with them. If these statements were written by someone else using Paul’s name, they could have been exposed without difficulty at any time during the first generation after the events reported. Also, it is difficult to explain why anyone using Paul’s name falsely as a means of gaining influence would include such a sharp attack on some of the readers as is found in 3:10, 11. On such counts, the traditional affirmation that Paul wrote 2 Thessalonians continues to stand firm."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["Second Thessalonians mentions an earlier letter from Paul (2:15). In all likelihood, this earlier letter was 1 Thessalonians; thus, 2 Thessalonians is to be dated shortly after it, about A.D. 51. Both letters were written from Corinth. As indicated in the Title and Author section above, the occasion for 2 Thessalonians was Paul’s need to further clarify doctrinal matters related to the future and the second coming of Christ, especially in response to rumors—even some attributed to Paul by word of mouth or forged correspondence (2:1, 2; 3:17)—that “the day of the Lord” had already occurred."]},{"heading":"Genre","content":["The book of 2 Thessalonians is a letter, and it generally follows standard first-century epistolary conventions (see “Introduction to the Epistles”). It contains a standard letter opening (1:1, 2), body (1:3–3:15), and conclusion (3:16–18). Like 1 Thessalonians, this letter does not fit neatly into any of the various types of first-century epistles that have been identified. It is a mixed type letter in that it has characteristics of several kinds of letters. Although Paul identifies himself as the author (see Title and Author above), his second epistle to the Thessalonians differs from his other epistles in that the first-person plural is used throughout the letter (“we,” “us,” “our”). This reflects the opening of the letter, in which the senders are identified as “Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy.” It does not, however, mean that Paul is not the primary author since he does revert to the first-person singular on occasion, and he specifically identifies himself as the author in the close of the letter (2:5; 3:17). This prevalent use of the first-person plural is also characteristic of 1 Thessalonians. See Introduction to 1 Thessalonians: Genre."]},{"heading":"Literary Features","content":["Paul likely authored 2 Thessalonians shortly after 1 Thessalonians (see Date and Occasion above). It therefore shares some of the literary features of 1 Thessalonians. Paul has less to say about his pastoral ministry in 2 Thessalonians than he does in 1 Thessalonians, but he does speak to it (3:1–5). Paul also gives the Thessalonians guidance in pursuing sanctification (1:11, 12, 2:13–17) and in facing persecution (1:4–10). Two pastoral concerns that Paul addressed in 1 Thessalonians resurface in this letter: instruction about the return of Christ (2:1–11) and the importance of diligence in the callings that the Lord has assigned to each Christian (3:6–15).","Second Thessalonians continues Paul’s pattern in 1 Thessalonians of addressing these Christians in familial terms. He addresses them as “brothers” seven times in this short epistle (1:3; 2:1, 13, 15; 3:1, 6, 13). Although Paul addresses some difficult pastoral issues in this letter, he does so with the same kind of familial affection that he demonstrated in 1 Thessalonians."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["After he sent his first letter to the church at Thessalonica, Paul received further reports concerning the congregation. There was cause for rejoicing in their continued growth in faith, love, and patience (1:3, 4) as well as cause for concern in certain doctrinal and behavioral matters. Second Thessalonians was written mainly to supplement Paul’s earlier teaching by correcting a premature and unsettling announcement that the day of the Lord had already arrived (2:1–11). This misguided claim may have been due in part to wrong inferences drawn from Paul’s own teaching, coupled with the congregation’s painful experience of persecutions thought to be indicative of end-time disturbances.","A second motive for writing was to deal with the chronic idleness of some members (3:6–15). Their behavior had continued uncorrected since the last letter (1 Thess. 4:11, 12; 5:14) and, indeed, ever since the missionaries had been present (3:10, 11). Exhortations were made even then in an attempt to rectify the situation but, according to fresh reports (3:11), matters had only grown worse. Many scholars believe the cause of idleness was the erroneous expectation that the Lord’s return might happen so soon (2:1–3) that working for a living amounted to a lack of faith. Some connection between a faulty eschatology and faulty conduct of this sort likely occurred in the Thessalonian context. Yet it must be said that Paul never draws the connection himself. Since 3:10 shows that the problem had surfaced while the missionaries were still in Thessalonica, it is unlikely that eschatological errors gave birth to the problem, though they may have provided a convenient excuse for continuing in it."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["The Old Testament prophets speak frequently and powerfully about the “day of the Lord.” On this day, the Lord comes to earth and brings salvation and judgment, not only for Israel or her enemies, but for the whole world. The Psalms often celebrate the coming of the Lord to judge the world in righteousness. The New Testament tells us that in Jesus Christ the day of the Lord has already been inaugurated. Christ has accomplished salvation for all kinds of people, Jew and Gentile. He did so by becoming obedient unto death on the cross, where He bore judgment for the sins of His people; and by rising gloriously from the dead. However, the New Testament goes on to tell us that the day of the Lord has not yet come in its final and full form. Jesus Christ will one day return in glory, not to bear judgment but to bring judgment on all people. For the ungodly, the prospect of this return should be a great terror and should stir them to repentance and faith in Christ. For the godly, however, Christ’s coming is something for which we eagerly hope, and this hope transforms our lives in the present."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["One of the most difficult passages in this letter—and in all of Paul’s writings—is 2 Thess. 2:1–12. This passage concerns the rise and activity of the “man of lawlessness” (“man of sin” in older translations, following poorer manuscripts). Christians have long speculated about the identity of the man of lawlessness. First John 2:18 refers to a report known to John’s hearers “that antichrist is coming” and goes on to assert that many antichrists, who deny Jesus’ identity as the Christ, were already at large in the first century. Paul does not apply the title “antichrist” to the man of lawlessness, although later generations of believers have identified the two. The beast of Rev. 13 has been identified as the antichrist/man of lawlessness, although the imagery in which the beast of Revelation is presented, drawn as it is from Dan. 7:2–8, suggests that the beast symbolizes a “kingdom,” a political-military-religious system or regime, represented by one individual.","Many Protestants in the Reformed tradition have argued that the man of lawlessness is the pope of the Roman Catholic Church. We cannot, however, be certain about the identity of the man of lawlessness, especially since 1 John 2:18 speaks of many antichrists. We do, however, know with certainty a few things about the revelation man of lawlessness, who seems to be the ultimate embodiment of the spirit of antichrist. First, what Paul calls the “mystery of lawlessness” is “already at work,” and it is under restraint in the providence of God (2:7). Second, the man of lawlessness will bring this activity to a head, leading rebellion against God (2:3). Third, his coming will be “by the activity of Satan with all power and false signs and wonders” (2:9). Those who follow him will do so as a divine judgment on their unbelief (2:10–12). Finally, he will be brought to an end, suddenly and effortlessly, by the return of Christ (2:8). In our uncertainties, it is reassuring to know that God will protect His people (3:3) and that Jesus Christ will bring the man of lawlessness and all His other enemies to naught at His return. Moreover, Paul’s calming of the Thessalonians’ eschatological excitement should caution succeeding generations, including ours, against becoming preoccupied with date-setting, in contradiction to our Lord’s specific statements (Mark 13:32; Acts 1:7)"]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"OF 2 THESSALONIANS","reference":""},{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"SALUTATION","reference":"1:1, 2"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"PAUL’S CAUSE FOR BOASTING","reference":"1:3–12"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Endurance During Persecution","reference":"1:3, 4"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Glorified at Christ’s Return","reference":"1:5–10"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Prayer for the Work of Faith","reference":"1:11, 12"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"INSTRUCTION","reference":"2:1–3:15"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"The Day of the Lord","reference":"2:1–12"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Prayer and Exhortation","reference":"2:13–3:5"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Labor","reference":"3:6–15"},{"level":1,"marker":"IV","text":"CONCLUDING BENEDICTION","reference":"3:16–18"}]}]}
