{"sections":[{"heading":"Title","content":["The book is named after the person whose life story and prophecies it records. The name “Daniel” means “God is my Judge.”"]},{"heading":"Author","content":["The authorship and date of the book of Daniel have been matters of considerable debate among biblical scholars. Traditionally, the prophet Daniel is assumed to be the author, but in recent decades this view has been questioned by many of the so-called “higher-critical” scholars of the Bible. The dispute centers on the way Daniel’s prophecies and visions look forward to a succession of four ancient empires, beginning with the Babylonian Empire (chs. 2; 7; 11). Daniel describes in great detail the historical relations between the Seleucid and Ptolemaic kingdoms just before and during the time of Antiochus IV Epiphanes (ch. 11). To account for this detailed knowledge, many scholars conclude that the book must have been written after the events of which it speaks. In this view, it was written by an unknown author around 170 B.C., during the lifetime of Antiochus IV, and not during the time of Daniel, who was taken to Bab­ylon in 605 B.C.","However, other factors favor the traditional view of authorship, not the least of which is the fact that those who deny that Daniel authored the book that bears his name generally do so because they presuppose that supernatural activities such as predictive prophecy are impossible. The book itself indicates that Daniel was its author (9:2; 10:2) and that it was written shortly after the capture of Babylon by Cyrus in 539 B.C. Also, Jesus quoted the prediction of “the abomination of desolation” found in this book as having been “spoken of by the prophet Daniel” (Matt. 24:15). There is no reason to assume that Daniel, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, could not have predicted in such great detail the events he describes. The Lord, after all, “declar[es] the end from the beginning” (Isa. 46:10) and “works all things according to the counsel of his will” (Eph. 1:11). The book’s message of God’s precise control of future history was very relevant to Daniel himself and the hearers of his own day as they underwent the trials of the exilic period. In assuring his readers that God controls the future, he teaches that the Lord also controls the present, making the prophecies of the future meaningful for Daniel’s original readers and firmly establishing a purpose for Daniel to write his book in the era that he did."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["The arguments that have been offered for dating the book of Daniel during the time of Antiochus IV Epiphanes involve three issues: (1) the nature of Old Testament prophecy; (2) historical problems; and (3) the Aramaic language used in the book. Each of these topics will be considered in turn.","Generally speaking, the prophets of Israel were primarily concerned with the religious and social circumstances confronting their contemporaries, rather than with predicting events in the distant future. When the prophets did predict future events, they often foresaw incidents in the near term, such as Jeremiah’s prophecies about the imminent fall of Jerusalem to the Babylonians. However, Daniel’s vision concerning the “king of the north” and the “king of the south” describes with amazing precision the history of relations between the Seleucid and Ptolemaic empires existing at the time of Antiochus IV Epiphanes (11:2–39 and notes), though the description of the circumstances surrounding the death of the king (11:40–12:3) does not correspond to what is otherwise known about Antiochus’s death. On this basis, some scholars argue that the book of Daniel was written in Antiochus’s time, shortly before his death, more than four hundred years after the prophet’s lifetime. The reasoning here is somewhat circular, in that the idea that Israelite prophets did not predict events in the more distant future is based on the assumption that the prophecies in Daniel are late, as well as on a similar assumption regarding Isaiah’s prophecies concerning Cyrus (Is. 44:28; 45:1). A rejection of the possibility of predictive prophecy in general is what drives these conclusions, not actual textual and historical evidence.","Interpreters of the book of Daniel who favor a late date of writing also propose that serious historical problems exist in the narratives about Daniel’s experiences in Babylon, particularly concerning Belshazzar’s relationship to Nebuchadnezzar (5:2 note) and the identity of “Darius the Mede” (6:1 note). Such interpreters typically identify the four kingdoms foreseen by Daniel (chs. 2; 7) as the Babylonians, the Medes, the Persians, and the Greeks (including the Seleucids and Ptolemies). This identification is difficult because there is no evidence for a Median kingdom in an interval between the Babylonian and Persian empires. The Persian king Cyrus (r. 550–530 B.C.) conquered the Medes in 549 B.C. and the Babylonians in 539 B.C. (5:1, 31 notes).","On the other hand, many scholars who date the book in the time of Daniel interpret the sequence of kingdoms as the Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Greek, and Roman empires. They point to the reference to “the Medes and Persians” in 5:28 as evidence that Daniel considered them as constituting one kingdom. Other scholars see the number “four” as a symbolic representation of completeness, as in the four winds of heaven (Dan. 7:2). They note the alternation between “kings” and “kingdoms” as if these were entirely interchangeable in Daniel’s mind (cf. 7:17 with 7:23).","Concerning the date of the language used in Daniel, a large segment (2:4–7:28) is written in Aramaic rather than Hebrew. The reason for the change of language is not known. The Aramaic is probably of a later type, since the Aramaic of both Ezra and Daniel is closer to the later type of Aramaic found in the Dead Sea Scrolls copied by the community at Qumran than it is to the earlier type of Aramaic (official Aramaic) used in the Persian period (522–330 B.C.). A strong argument can be made that these late forms entered the book through the work of editors who preserved the prophet’s writings for later generations, using recent Aramaic terms that readers would more easily understand. This practice of modernization of language in manuscript transmission was common in the ancient world, and if this practice is taken into account, there is no reason to suppose that this document could not have been written during Daniel’s years in exile. Finally, many other scholars have demonstrated that much of the Aramaic vocabulary in the book of Daniel was in use long before the period of the Qumran community (167 B.C.–70 A.D.), pointing the composition of the book occurring in Daniel’s lifetime.","Some have pointed to the use of several Greek loanwords for musical instruments (3:5 note) as another indication of a late date. However, there is abundant evidence of contact between the Greeks and the Near East long before the time of Alexander the Great, indeed, even before the fifth century B.C. Such contact is sufficient to explain the appearance of the Greek loanwords.","In sum, the language of the book of Daniel does not present any compelling reason to doubt that the book was composed during the prophet’s lifetime."]},{"heading":"Genre and Literary Features","content":["The book of Daniel falls into two distinct halves. The first portion (chs. 1–6) is a narrative of the challenges faced by Daniel and his three friends (commonly known by their Babylonian names, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego) at the Babylonian court. All four were exiled as young men but maintained a faithful witness to the Lord in spite of persecution. They were miraculously delivered from death in a fiery furnace (ch. 3) and in a lion’s den (ch. 6). In many respects, their behavior models Jeremiah’s counsel to the exiles in Jer. 29 to seek the peace of the city to which they had been exiled while waiting for the Lord to bring them home again.","The latter part of the book (chs. 7–12) is apocalyptic; that is, it is a heavenly revelation of the end of the present age of conflict and its replacement with the final, eschatological age of peace, a transformation that is depicted in strange and mysterious imagery. Both parts of the book have the goal of comforting and exhorting the faithful, however, and the message of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream in ch. 2 is essentially the same as that of Daniel’s apocalyptic vision in ch. 7. Both portions speak to those undergoing trials and persecution and seek to give them hope that their present sufferings, however terrible, will not be in vain. God is the powerful sovereign ruler of all things, and He is able to rescue His saints from trials—or through trials—so human faithfulness to God will have its eventual reward."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["The historical narratives in Daniel are not a connected historical discourse, but are independent units placed together for a specific purpose. The narratives do not give a history of Israel under Babylonian or Persian rule, nor do they give a biographical history of Daniel or his friends. The common thread is an emphasis on the way God’s absolute sovereignty operates in the affairs of all nations (2:47; 3:17, 18; 4:28–37; 5:18–31; 6:25–28).","Nebuchadnezzar’s vision in chapter 2 shows that history is not under the control of other gods, nor can its mystery be discovered by human manipulation. History is under the control of the God who is utterly free to direct it and to reveal it as He pleases (Rev. 5:9). According to His sovereign pleasure, He will intervene among the kingdoms of this world and establish a universal kingdom that will endure forever.","These truths are always of importance for God’s people in any era, especially when they suffer for their faith, but also when they suffer in various unexplained ways. The Jews may not have been subject to widespread and systematic persecution during the time of their subjection to Babylonian and Persian rulers, but sometimes they felt strong pressure applied, as Daniel and his friends could testify. Moreover, living in an empire where they were daily bombarded with pagan propaganda on the power of their gods must have challenged the faith of many.","Systematic attempts to abolish the faith of the Jews did occurred during the reign of Antiochus IV, who named himself “Epiphanes,” meaning “God manifest.” Antiochus IV, who ruled the Seleucid Empire from 175 to 164 B.C., tried to force the Jews to accept Greek culture and to abandon their religious practices. Many Jews submitted, but others refused and suffered severe persecution. They would have found great comfort in the book of Daniel, just as the early Christians suffering under the Roman authorities would also have found it intensely relevant in their own day. Daniel’s relevance, of course, has endured long past the era of the first Christians. Those who face the pressure of hostility today can learn from the model of Daniel and his friends, who refused to compromise with paganism at every turn.","In addition to these overarching themes of Daniel, certain key concepts are relevant to discussion of the book. One of these is a “time of trouble” (12:1), commonly taken to be the “great tribulation” that is to precede the second coming of Christ (Matt. 24:21; Luke 21:23; Rev. 2:22; 7:14). Matthew links this trouble with “the abomination of desolation” (Matt. 24:15) predicted by Daniel (cf. Dan. 9:27; 12:11) and fulfilled by the Antichrist (the “man of lawlessness” in 2 Thess. 2:3, 4).","The “Antichrist” may also be included in Daniel’s theology (Dan. 7:8, 20–22, 24–27; 11:36–45). The word does not occur outside the letters of John (1 John 2:18, 22; 4:3; 2 John 7), but both testaments contain references to a person of satanic hatred who appears in the final days of human history before Christ’s second coming. The Antichrist sets up the “abomination that makes desolate” (Dan. 11:31; cf. Matt. 24:15), exalts himself as a god (Dan. 11:36–39; 2 Thess. 2:3, 4), and is ultimately destroyed by Christ upon His return (Dan. 11:45; 2 Thess. 2:8 [cf. Is. 11:4]; Rev. 19:20)."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["The primary focus of the book of Daniel is the absolute sovereignty of God. Jerusalem may be destroyed with its temple in ruins, God’s people may be in exile, and wicked rulers may seem triumphant, but God remains supreme. God is greater than all circumstances, and His people should be true to Him in whatever situation they find themselves.","The truth of God’s sovereignty should comfort His people during periods of persecution, and indeed, one of the primary purposes of Daniel is to encourage God’s people to trust in the Lord who directs history and whose will cannot be thwarted (4:35). Daniel also urges his readers to look beyond the horizon of their current circumstances, beyond Babylon, Antiochus IV Epiphanes, or Rome, to the coming of Christ, the One whose “dominion is an everlasting dominion.” It is Christ who, according to the purposes of God, will ultimately liberate His people, destroy all human kingdoms, and establish His eternal kingdom of righteousness and peace."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["The book of Daniel tells the story of some of the Jews who were exiled by Nebuchadnezzar and testifies to God’s faithfulness to His promise to be with those who were in exile (Jer. 24; Ezek. 11). He sustained them in an often-hostile environment, as He would continue to sustain the remnant of His people after their return (see Ezra–Nehemiah). The promise that the kingdoms of this world will become the kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ (Rev. 11:15) is anticipated in Daniel’s visions (chs. 2; 7). The kingdom is inaugurated with the first coming of Christ (Matt. 10:7) and will be consummated at Christ’s return. In the meantime, His faithful people will often face the kind of persecution and even martyrdom that God’s people faced in Daniel’s day."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["One of Jesus’ favorite terms for Himself was “Son of Man,” a term that combines the idea of “mere humanity” (as is evident from its use in the book of Ezekiel) with the overtones of the divine and exalted “son of man” in Dan. 7:13. This human figure bears the marks of deity in that he comes on the clouds (a sign of deity throughout the ancient Near East), and receives the right to exercise judgment over all kingdoms and nations. In Dan. 7, the son of man is connected with the “saints” who suffer faithfully in the face of persecution, just as Jesus Himself suffered faithfully for His people.","In Luke 20:18 (which combines Dan. 2:34, 35 with Is. 8:14, 15), Jesus is identified as the stone that crushes all previous world empires, replacing them with His own unending kingdom."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["There have been significant variations in overall approach to the book of Daniel, centering especially on its prophecies of the future. These variations fall into three main categories. The first approach is taken by those who conclude that the book was written in the time of Antiochus IV Epiphanes. According to this view, all references to events before the time of Antiochus are ordinary history, written after the events described. The only genuine prediction in the book is of the anticipated death of Antiochus and the expected intervention of God to establish His kingdom. However, Antiochus did not die in the manner depicted (11:36–12:3 note) and the kingdom did not materialize as apparently anticipated, so the interpreters who hold this view see Daniel as a failure in predicting the king’s end. See notes on 2:44; 7:14, 18. This view has largely been held by modern interpreters who have rejected the idea that biblical prophecy can have a predictive component.","A second, more traditional view finds the primary emphasis of the book’s predictions to be on events beginning with the first coming of Christ. In this view, the focus is on the establishment of the “kingdom that shall never be destroyed” (2:44) at the coming of the “son of man” (7:13), who comes to “put an end to sin, and to atone for iniquity, to bring in everlasting righteousness” (9:24). In His obedient life and vicarious death, Christ accomplished salvation for His people and ushered in the kingdom of God, which now awaits consummation at His return.","A third view sees a dual focus: one on Antiochus IV Epiphanes and the persecution of God’s people during his reign, and the other on the divine intervention in human affairs at the end of time when God’s kingdom is established. In this view, the emphasis is not on the first coming of Christ (chs. 2; 9 notes), but rather on Antiochus and the second coming of Christ. Within this approach, there are many differences in the interpretation of details by various commentators. Some forms of this view date back to the early church fathers, while others are distinctly more modern, rooted in nineteenth- and twentieth-century dispensationalism. One striking difference is that the early church fathers tended to see the book as a celebration of martyrdom and a call to it, whereas modern dispensationalism has often seen in the book a promise that Christians will be “raptured” before the end, thus avoiding suffering through the worst episodes of history."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"THE NARRATIVES","reference":"CHS. 1–6"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"God’s Vindication of Daniel and His Friends for Their Faithfulness","reference":"ch. 1"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Daniel’s Interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar’s Dream","reference":"ch. 2"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"God’s Deliverance of Daniel’s Friends from the Fiery Furnace","reference":"ch. 3"},{"level":2,"marker":"D","text":"God’s Judgment and Restoration of Nebuchadnezzar","reference":"ch. 4"},{"level":2,"marker":"E","text":"God’s Judgment on Belshazzar","reference":"ch. 5"},{"level":2,"marker":"F","text":"God’s Deliverance of Daniel from the Lions’ Den","reference":"ch. 6"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"DANIEL’S VISIONS","reference":"CHS. 7-12"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Vision of the Four Beasts and the Establishment of God’s Kingdom","reference":"ch. 7"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Vision of the Ram and the Goat","reference":"ch. 8"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Vision of the Seventy Weeks","reference":"ch. 9"},{"level":3,"marker":"1","text":"Daniel’s prayer concerning the seventy weeks","reference":"9:1–19"},{"level":3,"marker":"2","text":"God’s answer concerning the seventy weeks","reference":"9:20–27"},{"level":2,"marker":"D","text":"Vision of the Angel and the Future History of God’s People","reference":"chs. 10–12"},{"level":3,"marker":"1","text":"The angel’s message to Daniel","reference":"10:1–11:1"},{"level":3,"marker":"2","text":"Near Eastern history from the time of Daniel to Antiochus IV Epiphanes","reference":"11:2–20"},{"level":3,"marker":"3","text":"The rule of Antiochus IV Epiphanes","reference":"11:21–35"},{"level":3,"marker":"4","text":"The rule of the Antichrist","reference":"11:36–12:3"},{"level":3,"marker":"5","text":"A final message to Daniel: How long?","reference":"12:4–13"}]}]}
