{"sections":[{"heading":"Title","content":["Named after its principal character, the book has always been known as “Esther.” A member of the Jewish diaspora community in the Persian capital of Susa around 480 B.C., Esther was swept up in events beyond her control to become the wife of the emperor. Her royal status enabled her, under God, to intervene and reverse the threatened annihilation of her people. The book is not mentioned or quoted explicitly in the New Testament, but in rabbinic tradition it was, not surprisingly, read at the feast of Purim (see Date and Occasion)."]},{"heading":"Author","content":["Although the author of the book of Esther is unknown, his interest in the origin and observance of the festival of Purim, his intense nationalism, and his intimate knowledge of the Persian court, customs, and geography suggest that he was a Persian Jew living in Susa. Mordecai has been suggested as the author, but this cannot be established. Modern suggestions of female authorship are at variance with normal practices of the culture from which the book comes."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["The earliest possible date for the book is shortly after the events described in it, that is, the mid-fifth century B.C. The latest possible date is during the first century B.C. A late fifth- or fourth-century dating is now generally preferred by scholars, who point to linguistic evidence as well as the author’s favorable attitude toward the Persian king and Gentiles in general as evidence for an early date.","The writer of Esther wrote his book to explain the origin of the celebration of Purim, to establish Purim as a festival celebrated by each new generation of Jews, and to regulate its observance (9:20–32). He also conveyed the message that it was possible for Jews to work within the governmental structures of a heathen empire in such a way that the antagonism of their enemies could, with divine assistance, be thwarted. Moreover, he conveyed that God is able to deliver and protect His people through the providential ordering of circumstances, not just through dramatic miracles."]},{"heading":"Genre","content":["Is this an historical narrative, skillfully written to bring out certain truths? Or is it pious fiction, intended to set out the same truths? The vast majority of modern scholars favor the latter option even though the book contains no obviously supernatural intervention such as miracles, which is so often used to designate a work as fanciful.","There are, however, significant features that point to the historical accuracy of the narrative. For instance, the banquet in Ahasuerus’s (Xerxes’s) third year (1:3) corresponds with the great council in 483 B.C. to plan for the invasion of Greece, as is related by the Greek historian Herodotus. The four-year gap between the banquet of 1:3 and the seventh year of Ahasuerus’s reign when Esther was brought into the royal presence (2:16) corresponds to the time Ahasuerus was off fighting the Greeks (see 2:1 note). The author also reveals an impressive knowledge of the layout of Susa and especially of the palace. Many Persian terms for objects and Persian names are found in the book, and almost all of them are also attested in ancient Persian texts.","Difficulties over matters such as the number of provinces in the Persian Empire (1:1) and the lack of external attestation for the existence of Vashti (1:9), Esther, and Mordecai (2:5) are not as significant or insurmountable as they appear to some scholars."]},{"heading":"Literary Features","content":["The book of Esther is renowned for the high quality of its literary artistry, which functions as the principal vehicle for its religious meaning. The author skillfully uses narrative tensions created by reversals or sharp contrasts of fortunes and expectations, as well as by roles that are often highly ironic in nature. Notice the two descriptions of banquets held by Ahasuerus and his wife, the first described in full detail and the second presented tersely (1:1–9); the striking contrast between the initial portrait of the king as powerful and pompous (1:1–8) and the subsequent revelation of his incompetence and weakness; the effective contrast between the king’s response when Vashti fails to appear before him and when Esther appears unannounced (1:11–21; 5:1–3); the ironic reversal of Haman’s career (6:4–12); the pathetic scene in which Haman pleads for Esther’s mercy, only to be accused of attempted rape (7:7–9); and the poetic justice of hanging Haman on his own gallows. The last is an example of the ironic reversals in the fortunes and position of Haman and Mordecai (7:9, 10; 8:1, 2; 9:25). Such reversals, when compared with those of the exodus, the Babylonian exile, and even the crucifixion and resurrection, subtly reveal God’s hand in the salvation history of His people.","The writer also uses repetition or duplication to weave the various parts of the story together. For example, notice the three references to official records (“chronicles”) located at significant turning points in the narrative (2:23; 6:1; 10:2). There are three sets of paired banquets marking the beginning, middle, and end of the book: the banquets of Ahasuerus (1:3, 4, 5–8), Esther (5:4–8; 7:1–10), and the two celebrations of Purim (9:18–32). See also the banquet theme in 1:9; 2:18; 3:15; 8:17; 9:17; the threefold mention of the size of Ahasuerus’s empire (1:1; 8:9; 9:30); the repeated promise to Esther of “even to the half of my kingdom” (5:3, 6; 7:2; see 9:12); the repeated insistence that the Hebrews did not plunder their enemies (9:10, 15, 16); the two accounts of Esther’s hidden identity (2:10, 20); the double assembling of virgins (2:8, 19); Haman’s two interchanges with his wife and friends (5:10–14; 6:13, 14); the two veilings of Haman’s head (6:12; 7:8); the two references to the subsiding of Ahasuerus’s anger (2:1; 7:10); and the two reminders that the laws of the Medes and Persians cannot be altered (1:19; 8:8). The use of the number seven is noteworthy (1:5, 10, 14), as is Esther’s repeated request and reception of favor (2:9, 15, 17; 5:2, 8; 7:3; 8:9).","The literary technique of foreshadowing is also employed in the book. Most striking is the prediction of Haman’s wife that he would “surely fall” because Mordecai was a Jew (6:13). The author is a master of suspense and paces the speed of the narrative well. The constant references to time not only present the events as history (1:1, 2) and underscore the theme of God’s providential working in history but also keep the story moving (e.g., 2:1, 15, 19, 21; 3:1).","The writer of Esther creatively builds upon the symbolic or typical aspects of the names of two of the main characters to show how the personal antagonism between Haman, the archenemy of the Jews, and Mordecai, the faithful Jew, was part of the historic conflict between Israel and the Amalekites. This conflict provides the foundation for the plot against all the Jews (2:5 note; 3:1 note). Similarities in phrasing, setting, story line, and emphasis also suggest that the Joseph story was an important model for the writer of Esther (note the similarities between 2:2–4 and Gen. 41:34–37; 3:10; Gen. 41:42; 8:6; and Gen. 44:34)."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["A number of important themes are intertwined in the book. The theme of feasting or banquets establishes the setting of the main action of the narrative, culminating with the celebration of Purim and contrasting with the theme of fasting (4:3, 16; 9:31). A contrast of obedience and disobedience also runs through the book. The initial disobedience of Vashti in chapter 1 sets the stage for the challenges facing Esther about obeying Mordecai (2:10, 20; 4:8–16) and standing up against the king’s law (4:11, 16; 5:1, 2). The stage is also set for Mordecai’s refusal to obey Haman’s command and his contrary willingness to carry out Esther’s instructions (4:17) and to serve both the Persian king and the best interests of the Jews (10:3). The theme of providential protection of the Jews, as indicated in 4:14, is basic to the narrative and is a reason for the book’s continuing significance among the community of faith. Related to this theme is that of rest and relief from enemies, which the feast of Purim commemorates (9:16, 22, see Deut. 25:19)."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["The theology of a book that does not explicitly mention God may seem to be an elusive concept. It is to the credit of the writer that in a low-key fashion, he conveys through the narrative that God is always present with His people, even when His presence is not obvious or acknowledged. The pattern of events he describes can only be explained by the unseen hand of God at work. Most analyses of the literary structure of the book identify chapter 6 as the fulcrum of the story, and that chapter does not focus on either Esther or Mordecai but on a king who, for some reason, cannot get to sleep. If sleep is a gift given by God (Ps. 127:2), is not insomnia a sign that He is at work? Furthermore, in 4:14 Mordecai sets out his belief that there are no coincidences in life. “From another place” points obliquely to God as the source of help and as the one who has brought Esther to the royal position she occupies. The acts of mourning, fasting, and wearing sackcloth in 4:3, 16 are not merely conventional expressions of grief; they embody a belief in God and would be accompanied by prayer. Similarly the indirect passive “had been turned” (9:22) invites the question as to the instrumental agency effecting this change. In these ways and others, the author repeatedly hints at God’s presence behind the incidents described.","The narrative also raises the question of how God can be providentially in control of events on earth while individuals such as Haman, intent on genocide, are able to attain a powerful position of influence. The answer has to lie in the fact that our world remains in rebellion against God while He works out His purposes of blessing and judgment in it. “The Lord has made everything for its purpose, even the wicked for the day of trouble” (Prov. 16:4). God may withdraw His restraining hand both to make clear the virulent hostility of evil men and to induce a deeper dependence on Himself among those whose trust is in Him.","The need for cultivating such increased reliance and stronger faith is apparent in the compromised stance of Mordecai and Esther at the beginning of the narrative. Unlike Daniel, who adhered to Jewish dietary practices (Dan. 1:8) and made no secret of his allegiance (Dan. 2:28; 6:16), Mordecai and Esther initially concealed their nationality and beliefs because of pressure to assimilate to the surrounding culture. Only the events in which they were caught led them to reveal their background.","Finally, the book is a fitting illustration of the ambiguities of divine providence in an era when the Lord is not speaking through his prophets. Israel, in exile, lived in an era of ambiguity. Mordecai and Esther, members of the exilic community, did not enjoy an explicit revelation of the way forward. They and their fellow Jews needed to trust God, and God does meet them in surprising ways as the narrative unfolds. Today, God’s people must often deal with a similar ambiguity. As we wait for the return of Christ, we do not always know the clear way forward when we must make decisions and deal with the unexpected in our lives. We must trust the Lord and follow His revealed will as He works out events in our lives in ways that we do not often anticipate."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["The seeming absence of God in Esther does not detract from its contribution to the development of the ongoing message of Scripture. The narrative exemplifies the divinely ordained structure of human history set out in the protoevangelium, the enmity between the two seeds (Gen. 3:15). It focuses on the survival of the people of God at a time when the political power of this world’s empire has the ascendancy, and they themselves are weak and helpless. Furthermore, although God is not named, He is far from absent. Though His people are not to expect visible, overwhelming, miraculous displays of divine power to transform their situation, God remains firmly in control through His providential intervention. He truly governs “all his creatures and all their actions.” In grace, He protects even their faltering witness."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["There are no direct prophecies of Christ in Esther. However, the account of the intervention to protect the community in Esther’s day does serve to stir up a desire for the greatest intervention of all, the coming of the Messiah."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["The question of whether the book of Esther belongs in the canon of Scripture was raised early on by both Jews and Christians, though the book’s commendation of the popular festival of Purim argued strongly in favor of its inclusion in the Jewish canon. Objections voiced by some Christians to Esther’s canonicity included its absence from some of the earliest lists of canonical books, its lack of citation in the New Testament, its dearth of overt references to God and to religious practices, its excessive Jewish nationalism, and its spirit of vengeance. Some of these objections were alleviated by the expanded version of the book of Esther found in the Septuagint (the Greek translation of the Old Testament). This Septuagint text contains over one hundred verses not found in the Hebrew text, which made the book more religiously acceptable to some. These additions include a dream of Mordecai about the coming destruction of the Jews and prayers of Mordecai and Esther for deliverance. However, when the Protestant churches judged the shorter Hebrew version of Esther to be the authoritative version, objections to the book’s canonicity resurfaced.","The violence in book is a kind of civil war, which Cicero called the worst of all calamities. The author of Esther shows the relief of the people when justice triumphs and does not criticize the means employed, such as the hanging of Haman’s sons. But it would be a mistake to consider these events as models for behavior. The extreme situation and threat under which they happened limits what can be concluded from them. The author does not engage in moral reflection about the massive killing and the motives of the avengers. The reader struggling with some of the questions that arise needs to go to other places such as the prophets, Job, or Revelation, where the discussion includes such questions and answers may be found. Positively, the book of Esther testifies clearly to the invisible hand of providence that will not allow the covenant people to be utterly destroyed."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"INTRODUCTION","reference":"CHS. 1; 2"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"The Downfall of Queen Vashti","reference":"ch. 1"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"The Rise of Queen Esther","reference":"2:1–18"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"A Conspiracy Discovered by Mordecai","reference":"2:19–23"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"HAMAN PLOTS TO DESTROY THE JEWS","reference":"3:1–5:14"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Haman’s Promotion and Plot against the Jews","reference":"ch. 3"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Mordecai’s Counterplan","reference":"ch. 4"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Esther’s Uninvited Audience with the King","reference":"5:1–8"},{"level":2,"marker":"D","text":"Haman’s Plan to Hang Mordecai","reference":"5:9–14"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"THE LORD SAVES THE JEWS","reference":"6:1–9:16"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Haman’s Humiliation and Mordecai’s Reward","reference":"6:1–13"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Haman’s Execution","reference":"6:14–7:10"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Plan for Deliverance of the Jews","reference":"ch. 8"},{"level":2,"marker":"D","text":"Victory for the Jews","reference":"9:1–16"},{"level":1,"marker":"IV","text":"CONCLUSION","reference":"CHS. 9; 10"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Establishment of the Feast of Purim","reference":"9:17–32"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Epilogue","reference":"ch. 10"}]}]}
