{"sections":[{"heading":"Title and Author","content":["This prophetic book takes its title from its author, Habakkuk. Our only reliable information about him and his prophetic activity comes from the book itself. The meaning of his name is uncertain.","The reference in 1:1 to Habakkuk as “the prophet” may imply that he was well known. His use of the cultic and wisdom traditions of Israel in his preaching have given rise to the doubtful notion that he was a prophet attached to the temple in Jerusalem, though the suggestion that he worked in Jerusalem is attractive. We can be sure, however, that in this book we meet a true prophet with a burning zeal for the glory of the Lord. His “oracle” (1:1 and note) is remarkable in that it is not, in the first place, a word directed to the people, but an answer to his own painful questions."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["Dates proposed for Habakkuk derive from two considerations: the period of Judah’s history described in 1:2–4 and the stage in the rise of the Chaldeans referred to in 1:6. The latter verse strongly suggests that while the Chaldeans, or Neo-Babylonians, were not yet the dominant power in the Near East when Habakkuk wrote, they had already begun to make their presence felt. This indicates a time after 626 B.C., when the Chaldeans under Nabopolassar seized control of Babylon from the Assyrians, which rules out the references in 1:2–4 as being to Judah during Manasseh’s reign. Since 1:2–4 do not cohere with the reforming character of Josiah’s reign, a date after his death in 609 B.C.—a period when the evil reign of Jehoiakim formed a sad contrast to that of his father, the good king Josiah (Jer. 22:13–19; 26:20–23)—becomes probable. Moral and spiritual deterioration in Judah accelerated as king and people alike insolently flouted the covenant laws.","Meanwhile, the Chaldeans had successfully combined with the Medes to overthrow Nineveh in 612 B.C., but the dominance of Babylon was not clearly established until the battle of Carche­mish in 605 B.C., when Pharaoh Neco II and his Egyptian army, who had come to assist the Assyrians against Babylon, were soundly defeated by Nebuchadnezzar II. Most of Habakkuk’s ministry probably occurred during Jehoiakim’s reign (609–598 B.C.), with chapter 1 coming from before 605 B.C. and chapters 2 and 3 originating after that."]},{"heading":"Genre and Literary Features","content":["Habakkuk is an unusual prophecy in that there is no direct public address to the people. The book is rather a record of the prophet’s own struggles with questions of faith. In chapters 1 and 2, a dialogue, in the form of a question-and-answer session, takes place between the prophet and God. Habakkuk’s prayers or complaints to God have a structure similar to lament psalms (such as Pss. 10; 12) in which a complaint is followed by a divine response.","The oracles of chapters 1 and 2 are followed by a psalm in chapter 3, with dedication and directions for performance (3:1, 19). This triumphant song is occasioned by a theophanic vision (3:3–15), which culminates in the complete trust expressed in the personal testimony of the prophet (3:17–19). Throughout this book, Habakkuk’s writing style reflects the depth and intensity of his feelings, especially the perplexity with which he wrestles and the assurance that his faith gains."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["Prophets were not only inspired preachers of divine messages to the people of God; they also shared the Lord’s burden for His broken world and His deep concern for His wayward people. In this respect, Habakkuk closely resembles Jeremiah. But even more than with Jeremiah, Habakkuk’s dialogue with God and his persistent prayers (2:1, 2; 3:2, 16) take the place of prophetic preaching as the heart of the book’s message.","Like Nahum, Habakkuk deals with God’s sovereign control over human affairs—not when He intervenes in judgment, but rather with the times when He does not make His control apparent. Habakkuk experienced a profound spiritual crisis because of the Lord’s seeming indifference to appalling spiritual conditions among His people (1:2–4). In particular, Habakkuk is troubled by God’s apparent inaction when society in Judah is dominated by the wicked at the expense of the righteous (1:4). The absence of covenant life and obedience was dangerous to the people of God, but even more it was a rejection of the covenant Lord and an insult to Him. Because only divine intervention could change this deadly situation, Habakkuk was persistent in his appeal to the heavenly Judge, even when it seemed to be in vain (1:2). In response, the Lord revealed that He was about to do something that no one expected (1:5): He was going to raise up the Chaldeans as His instruments of judgment (1:6). However, for Habakkuk, this cure seemed even worse than the disease and only added to the prophet’s distress (1:12–17). How could the holy God, who cannot tolerate wrong (1:13), use such wicked people to fulfill His purposes? Does God really distinguish between good and evil in His sovereignty over history?","Convinced that the events of history were not determined by blind fate but by the righteous and holy God of Israel, Habakkuk expectantly waited on the Lord until he received an answer to his painful questions (2:1). The Lord’s reply came in the vision introduced in 2:2, 3, which provides a true perspective on history and gives the divine promise about its outcome. This answer does not resolve all the painful questions, but it does teach God’s people the way of covenant life in the here and now (2:3, 4). That way is to persevere in hope, waiting with confidence for the fulfillment of the Lord’s unfailing promise. Although God’s ways may be inscrutable, His purposes are consistent. They culminate in real life for the faithful, but woe and death for the self-sufficient and arrogant (2:4). The Lord’s presence in His temple affirms His Lordship over history and assures us that in the end, His legitimate claim to the whole world will be universally acknowledged (2:14, 20; Is. 45:21–25; 1 Cor. 15:24–28).","The revelation of the Lord’s sovereignty over history transforms Habakkuk’s complaint into a hymn of joy (3:2–20). Instead of passively waiting for divine intervention, he now prays positively that the Lord would act in accord with the deeds and qualities He displayed in the exodus and at Sinai. Anticipating the future, Habakkuk in his prayer celebrates the Lord’s coming (3:3–7), His judgment against the nations (3:8–12), and His triumph over all opposition (3:13–15). From this perspective of faith, even the threat of severe calamity could not dampen Habakkuk’s overwhelming joy in expectation of the coming salvation, a salvation guaranteed by the Lord’s faithfulness to Himself and to His revelation (3:17–19)."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["Habakkuk grapples with questions and doubts regarding God’s justice and His direction over the world. Despite his puzzlement, he does not relinquish his grasp of God as a refuge in perplexity and trouble (“Rock”; 1:12), as holy (1:13) and as one who is in control (1:14). It is the divine verdict that overrules human pride and power, and God alone can resolve the conundrums of history. Habakkuk also contributes to our theology of prayer. The complaints in chapters 1 and 2 and the prayer in chapter 3 all reflect the third petition of the Lord’s Prayer, “Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven” (Matt. 6:10). Through these prayers the prophet submits and rejoices in God’s will and the temporal outworking of his eternal plans and decrees."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["Paul uses Hab. 2:4 as a foundational text for his proclamation of the gospel (Rom. 1:17; Gal. 3:11; cf. Heb. 10:35–39). Like Habakkuk (ch. 1), Paul knew that sin is incompatible with God’s holiness and that the fatal tension between these opposites could only be resolved by divine intervention. The prophetic word to Habakkuk (ch. 2) reveals in principle the way God would deal with the incompatibility of sin and holiness. The cross of Christ and the final judgment are fulfillments of this revelation. Like Habakkuk, Paul also affirmed that true life is only possible in a relationship of total dependence on the Lord. Such dependence, based on the faithfulness of our God, transforms our existence in this world, filling our lives with joy in the certainty of God’s faithfulness to His promises (2:3; 3:17–19)."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["There are no direct messianic prophecies in Habakkuk, but the expectations embodied in 2:14 and chapter 3 require the coming of Christ for their fulfilment. The people of God must have a faith that looks outside of them to another. Such dependence, based on the faithfulness of our God, transforms our existence in this world, filling our lives with joy in the certainty of God’s fidelity to His promises (2:3, 4; 3:17–19)."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["Habakkuk may be called a forefather of the Reformation. The key concepts of his preaching, as taken over by Paul, deeply influenced Luther and Calvin, and eventually became watchwords of the Reformation. Only the perspective of faith, or persevering and obedient trust in God, provides for meaningful existence in the world during the present period, between the “already” of initial fulfillment of God’s promises and the “not yet” of their final realization."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"SUPERSCRIPTION","reference":"1:1"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"FIRST COMPLAINT: THE WICKED PROSPER OVER THE RIGHTEOUS","reference":"1:2–4"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"FIRST RESPONSE: THE LORD WILL SEND THE BABYLONIANS","reference":"1:5–11"},{"level":1,"marker":"IV","text":"SECOND COMPLAINT: WHY THE WICKED BABYLONIANS?","reference":"1:12–17"},{"level":1,"marker":"V","text":"SECOND RESPONSE: LIFE FOR THE FAITHFUL BUT WOE FOR THE WICKED","reference":"CH. 2"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"The Crucial Distinction Revealed","reference":"2:1–5"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"From Woe to Worship","reference":"2:6–20"},{"level":1,"marker":"VI","text":"THE PRAYER OF THE PROPHET","reference":"CH. 3"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Superscription; Invocation","reference":"3:1, 2"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Divine Self-Revelation","reference":"3:3–15"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Faith’s Expectation and Jubilation","reference":"3:16–19"}]}]}
