{"sections":[{"heading":"Title and Author","content":["Joel is the prophetic speaker of the words of the text (1:1). His name is a compound in Hebrew that literally means “Yahweh is God.” Since he is unknown from any other texts in the Old Testament, what we do know of him derives solely from the book itself. Joel’s keen interest in Jerusalem, particularly in the temple and its functionaries (e.g., 1:9, 13, 14; 2:14–17, 32; 3:1, 6, 16, 17), suggests that he lived in Jerusalem and may have often ministered near the temple."]},{"heading":"Date","content":["There are no specific chronological indicators within the book to help determine the date of its composition. Many scholars today date its writing to the time of the exile, after the destruction of Jerusalem at the hands of the Babylonians (586 B.C.). Those who hold to this dating scheme often rely on arguments from silence, such as the fact that no king is mentioned nor is Israel, the northern kingdom, spoken of. However, the setting of the prophecy is in the land of Judah, and temple worship is spoken of throughout the book. This evidence points to the fact that the book of Joel is not exilic but was written before Judah fell to Babylon. With all that in mind, however, it is perhaps best to conclude with Calvin that the date of the book cannot be known with certainty."]},{"heading":"Occasion","content":["The occasion of the book of Joel concerns a locust plague that descended upon Judah, one without parallel in the country’s history (1:2). The basic economy was ruined (1:11, 12). Even the sacrificial offerings in the temple were discontinued because of the vast agricultural devastation (1:13). Joel believed this plague to be God’s judgment on Judah because they were unrepentant (2:12, 13). It was, however, merely a temporal judgment but one that served as a warning or foretaste of a greater judgment that God will bring on impenitent people in the form of the eschatological “day of the Lord.”"]},{"heading":"Genre and Literary Features","content":["The book of Joel is a work of prophecy that is relayed primarily in a poetic fashion. The use of line parallelism, an indicator of Hebrew poetry, is prominent in the prophecy. For example, Joel 1:11 says,","Be ashamed, O tillers of the soil;","wail, O vinedressers,","for the wheat and the barley,","The prophet also employs numerous figures of speech, another indicator of Hebrew poetry, to provide vivid descriptions of his message. His use of symbolism, particularly in the locust plague, is a key feature of the book.","Joel’s prophecy is highly structured around the themes of judgment, deliverance, and “the day of the Lord.” The writer uses this repetition to underscore and emphasize the certainty of judgment. Beginning at 2:28, the pivot or hinge of the book is the monumental description of God pouring out His Spirit on His people. By the close of the book, great hope is held out for a restored Judah, Jerusalem, and proper temple worship."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["The principal theme of the book of Joel is “the day of the Lord,” a time of direct divine intervention in human history to reorder affairs on earth. This theme is associated with judgment upon Israel and Judah as well as the overthrow of their enemies. Such interventions in the flow of world history anticipated the final divine transformation of the day of judgment. Specifically the day of the Lord in Joel is focused on a future judgment against Judah and Jerusalem (2:32), and ultimately against all the nations of the world (3:1, 2). The day of the Lord also holds out a hope of restoration after judgment in which there will be a future deliverance for a repentant Israel (2:32).","Repentance is another key theme in Joel’s prophetic message. The call to repentance is given not merely to a select number of the covenant community but rather to all the Lord’s people who are called to return to Him: young and old, men and women, leaders and followers, and even those who might otherwise be exempted from community responsibilities (nursing mothers and newlyweds, 1:13, 14; 2:15–17). The return to God that Joel calls for involves the whole person. Such repentance is to be manifested externally through actions such as mourning, weeping, crying out to the Lord, and fasting (1:13, 14; 2:15–17). Because merely external or ritual manifestations of repentance are not adequate, the Lord calls the people also to show the sincerity of repentance by returning to the Lord “with all” their hearts (2:12, 13). Joel also reminds God’s people that motivation for repentance lies firmly in the nature of God: “he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love” (2:13). Joel stresses that the hope of restoration lies ultimately in God, who exercises His sovereign freedom and grace in granting repentance and forgiveness to the people."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["The book of Joel follows a pattern found in the majority of the prophetic books of the OT: oracles of judgment followed by oracles of salvation. Underpinning this common prophetic refrain is belief in the sovereignty of God. When, for example, Joel describes the locust plague that struck Judah (and symbolizes an invading army), he believes that it is the Lord who brought it (1:15; 2:11, 25). The ensuing repentance and salvation of the people also unfolds according to the providence of God (2:28, 29). Nature itself is at the beck and call of the Lord. Joel thus demonstrates that the Lord’s sovereign control extends to all things, including nature and human events. This complex vision of both the judgment and salvation of God leads to the declaration, “So you shall know that I am the Lord your God, who dwells in Zion, my holy mountain” (3:17).","The stress on the day of the Lord in Joel is also a significant contribution to biblical eschatology (doctrine of last things). Joel reminds readers that they cannot take present peace or prosperity for granted, that there is a day of judgment coming for the whole world in which all will have to make an account before God (3:1, 2). On that day, all who have not turned to the one true Lord through His Son, Jesus Christ, will find themselves under divine wrath."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["The book of Joel has had an important place in the life of the church. The New Testament indicates that Jesus and His followers were familiar with the writings of Joel. The book’s influence is most evident in the New Testament passages that speak of the end times. They use Joel’s vivid images to describe the day of the Lord and the plague of locusts (e.g., Mark 13:24; Luke 21:25; Rev. 6:12, 13; 9:2, 3). Also important are the promises in Joel 2:28–32, which Peter quotes at Pentecost, claiming they have reached their fulfillment in the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the disciples in Jerusalem (Acts 2:16–21). Paul in Rom. 10:13 also refers to the prophecy, using Joel 2:32 to show that “there is no distinction between Jew and Greek.” Salvation is offered to all peoples. As Joel states: “Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved” (2:32).","The church has continued to find the teaching in the book of Joel on the day of the Lord to be an important source of hope and comfort on the one hand, and a word of warning on the other. In times of distress and trouble, Christians have found the promises about the ultimate blessing, protection, and vindication of the Lord’s covenant community to be consoling and inspiring. At the same time, Joel’s graphic depiction of the dreadful aspects of the day of the Lord has served as a reminder of God’s holiness and judgment, and as a continuing call to wholehearted repentance and holiness of life."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["With the possible exception of 2:23 (see note), Joel does not directly mention a personal messiah or a royal deliverer. However, his prophecy frequently depicts general conditions of blessing associated with messianic times. Christ is evident in the text of Joel in the prophet’s climactic description of the outpouring of the Holy Spirit mentioned in (2:28–32), which was fulfilled at Pentecost (Acts 2:16–21). All those who repent and call on the name of the Lord will be saved (Acts 2:38–41; Rom. 10:13). Joel outlines the whole program of messianic intervention and deliverance, though he does so in general terms without chronological detail."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["Over the centuries, interpreters have struggled with many questions connected to the book of Joel, notably its occasion and date, and also whether the locust plague is to be understood literally or figuratively. Most ancient interpreters of Scripture saw that the invasion of locusts in ch. 1 as referring to a literal event brought on by the faithlessness of the people. However, many of these same interpreters found in ch. 2 references to the locusts as also having symbolic significance of later military invasions of the land. Some ancient readers, such as Gregory the Great interpreted the locusts as a hierarchy of vices. Theodore of Mopsuestia concluded that the locust plague did not refer to any natural phenomenon, but to the Assyrian and Babylonian invasions, though not to those of later times. Though Jerome also adopted a figurative interpretation, he argued that the various types of locust in 1:4 anticipated a series of invasions culminating in that of the Romans."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"SUPERSCRIPTION","reference":"1:1"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"CRISES DEMANDING REPENTANCE","reference":"1:2–2:17"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Recent Devastation by Locust and Drought","reference":"1:2–20"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Future Assault by the Lord’s Army","reference":"2:1–17"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"RESPONSES OF THE COVENANT GOD","reference":"2:18–3:21"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Physical Renewal of the Land","reference":"2:18–27"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Spiritual Renewal of the Lord’s People","reference":"2:28–32"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Final Judgment","reference":"ch. 3"},{"level":3,"marker":"1","text":"Judgment of the nations","reference":"3:1–15"},{"level":3,"marker":"2","text":"Blessing on God’s people","reference":"3:16–21"}]}]}
