{"sections":[{"heading":"Title and Author","content":["This fifth book of the twelve Minor Prophets takes its name from its principal character, “Jonah the son of Amittai” (1:1). Of Amittai, nothing is known. Outside of this composition Jonah is mentioned only in 2 Kin. 14:25, as “Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet, who was from Gath-hepher,” the proclaimer of God’s blessing to the northern kingdom of Israel during the reign of Jer­oboam II (793–753 B.C.). In accordance with that prophecy, Jeroboam extended the borders of his kingdom beyond the frontier of Syria. The divine message to Nineveh found in this book was spoken through this same Jonah; presumably, he or some other scribe wrote down this narrative after the events recounted."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["Based on 2 Kin. 14:25, the events recorded in the book of Jonah should be assigned to the mid-eighth century B.C. Determining the date of the book’s composition is a difficult task, however, and the book has been dated between the eighth and late third centuries B.C. No compelling evidence precludes an eighth-century date for the composition of the narrative (3:3 note), and it seems likely that the book was written before the destruction of Nineveh in 612 B.C.","The reign of Jeroboam II provides the setting for the Jonah story. This monarch was one of the strong military leaders in the history of the northern kingdom of Israel. According to 2 Kin. 14:25–28, he imposed his authority on the territories of Damascus and Hamath, thereby restoring Israel’s northern frontier to where it had been in the days of Solomon (1 Kin. 8:65). It is clear that Jeroboam’s reign, together with that of his Judean contemporary Azariah (also called Uzziah, 792–740 B.C.), ushered in a period of remarkable peace and prosperity. As both Elisha and Jonah had prophesied (2 Kin. 13:19–25; 14:25), the northern kingdom enjoyed territorial expansion at the expense of Syria. By the outward appearances of population growth, territorial expansion, and commercial activity, Israel was indeed blessed by God.","However, this was not the picture that was painted by the contemporary prophets Hosea and Amos as the kingdom fell into a state of social, moral, and religious decay. Their messages consisted, in part, of indictment and judgment of the nation for mixing the prescribed worship of the Lord with the idolatry of the surrounding peoples (religious syncretism) and for social injustice (Hos. 2:1–13; 4:1–5:14; Amos 2:6–16; 3:9–15). Eventually, because of their sin, God punished the people of Israel by sending the Assyrians, who under their king, Sargon II, captured Israel’s capital city, Samaria, in 722 B.C. According to Assyrian records, Sargon took into captivity more than 27,000 people. Since Hosea prophesied this punishment at the hands of the Assyrians (see Hos 9:3; 10:6; 11:5), Jonah probably realized that his actions in calling the people of Nineveh to repent would ultimately result in the destruction of his own nation."]},{"heading":"Genre","content":["The book of Jonah is a complex and highly artistic short story told in a compelling manner. As for the interpretation of the Jonah story proper, four distinct approaches have been suggested: allegory, midrash, parable, and historical narrative.","Allegory is a method of teaching truths or principles by means of symbolic fictional narrative. A good example is John Bunyan’s The Pilgrim’s Progress, an exciting fictional story that conveys the truth that the Christian life is a spiritual pilgrimage. However, the text of Jonah lacks any compelling indication that would call for such an allegorical understanding.","Midrash is a type of commentary on Scripture classically carried on by Jewish scholars during the first thousand years of the Christian era. Jonah is treated by some as a type of early midrash, or commentary, on passages such as Ex. 34:6, 7 (cf. Jon. 4:2), a commentary in which the events depicted are not necessarily historical. Such an approach fails to reckon with credible defenses of the book’s historicity and appears to conflict with Christ’s witness regarding Jonah’s experiences (Matt. 12:39–42; Luke 11:29–32).","The interpretation of the book of Jonah as a parable is perhaps the most common. A parable is a brief and usually fictitious story that conveys moral, religious, or spiritual truths. Parables are best illustrated by the teachings of Jesus (e.g., Matt. 13:45, 46; Luke 10:29–37; 15:11–32). Nathan’s parable in 2 Sam. 12:1–4 is a good Old Testament example. This view understands the Jonah narrative as a moral story with a teaching aim. There are a number of objections, however, to understanding the book of Jonah as a parable, such as the unusual complexity and length of the story. Also, and significantly, this interpretation also deprives the book of its historical foundation.","In spite of its shocking surprises and sensational elements, Jonah should be understood as historical and prophetic narrative. The story centers on a specific figure and was written as a historical composition. Jewish tradition regards the narrative as history, and Christ’s references to the story (Matt. 12:38–41; Luke 11:29–32) lend further support to the historicity of the work. Jesus did not understand the Jonah story as a mere parable, but as a narrative firmly rooted in historical reality.","Nevertheless, some scholars challenge the historical interpretation on several grounds, including the impossibility of the prophet’s survival inside the fish, the unlikelihood of the Ninevites’ dramatic repentance, the size of Nineveh at the time, and the fast rate of growth of the plant in chapter 4. Although some of these objections raise questions that must be considered and addressed, many of the criticisms spring from assumptions that deny God’s sovereignty in nature and history, including His ability to intervene supernaturally in the created order."]},{"heading":"Literary Features","content":["Although some scholars have challenged the literary unity of the book, suggesting theories of composite authorship or of substantial changes by a later editor, the present structure of the book suggests that it has been carefully composed. The book falls into two halves; the start of each is marked by God’s commanding Jonah to go to Nineveh. While some scholars have questioned the authenticity of Jonah’s thanksgiving psalm in 2:2–9 for his own rescue from death, it forms a striking contrast with his lack of gratitude in chapter 4 for the divine deliverance of the Ninevites. Unlike some stories whose plot structure demonstrates a kind of climax followed by a period of resolution, Jonah’s plot does not reach a climax until the end of chapter 4, which also concludes the book. It is one of only two books in the entire Hebrew Bible that end with a question (the other is Nahum)."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["Various themes have been suggested as summarizing the message of the book of Jonah.","1. Repentance. With good reason, Jews have traditionally read the book of Jonah on the Day of Atonement as part of their expression of repentance. Jews are to follow the example of the pagan sailors and wicked Ninevites who respond with repentance to prophetic preaching.","2. Unfulfilled prophecy. The nonfulfillment of Jonah’s pronouncement against the city of Nineveh draws attention to the conditional nature of divine prophecies.","3. Jewish attitudes towards Gentiles. The story of Jonah reveals that God’s salvation is not restricted to the Jews, but freely given to Gentiles.","4. Theodicy. The story examines the relationship between divine justice and mercy. Of these alternatives, the last has much to commend it, especially in the light of chapter 4, where a contrast is drawn between God’s pity for Nineveh and His destruction of the plant. Jonah, however, pities the plant, but calls for the destruction of Nineveh. Set against God, Jonah represents those who see divine justice and mercy as serving their own interests: mercy for themselves, but justice for their enemies. However, as the book of Jonah reveals, God is sovereign, His justice is impartial, and His forgiveness may extend to anyone.","Despite the narrative’s focus on the prophet, the book of Jonah is a story about the mercy and love of God. The Lord was the God of Israel, and that nation had been the special recipient of His covenant mercy and salvation. But Jonah, along with many of his countrymen, had responded with a national pride and ethnic particularism that blinded him to the grand scope of God’s grace. Jonah was to learn, along with the nation, that Israel did not have a monopoly on the redemptive love of God (Acts 10:34, 35; Rom. 3:29). The story affirms the words of Ps. 145:8: “The Lord is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love.”","Additionally, the book emphasizes God’s willingness to forgive the Ninevites even while knowing that soon afterward they would decimate the northern kingdom of Israel. Jonah cannot reconcile God’s forgiveness of the wicked inhabitants of Nineveh with His willingness to punish His own people Israel."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["The theme of God’s universal sovereignty over humanity and creation is maintained throughout the book. God is presented as the Creator, the Maker of land and sea (1:9). Creation responds obediently to His every command (1:4, 15, 17; 2:10; 4:6–8). Like the Assyrians of Isaiah’s day did God’s bidding (though unwittingly; Is. 10:5–7), creation serves the will of the Creator."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["In the New Testament, Jesus uses Jonah’s theme of God’s mercy on the nations as a rebuke to unrepentant Israel (Matt. 12:38–41; Luke 11:29–32). If the Ninevites repented at the preaching of the prophet Jonah, who was rescued from confinement in the huge fish, how much more should Israel repent at the preaching of Jesus, the Son of Man, who will be resurrected from the tomb? In a sense, then, Jesus magnifies God’s mercy on the Gentiles in order to rouse Israel to envy and repentance; the apostle Paul would do the same by his preaching to the Gentiles (Rom. 11:11–14)."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["When some Pharisees and teachers of the law demanded a miraculous sign from Jesus, he told them that the only sign they would receive would be “the sign of the prophet Jonah” (Matt. 12:39–42; cf. 16:4; Luke 11:29–32). Several comparisons exist between Jesus and Jonah. Both preached a message of repentance (Jon. 3:4, 5; Mark 1:14, 15). Both reappeared alive after three days. Both engaged in a mission that results in deliverance for repentant Gentiles but destruction for wicked Israelites/Jews (Jon. 3; Matt. 12:41, 42). Both offered their lives as a substitutionary sacrifice in order to save others (Jon. 1:11–16; Mark 10:45). Some or all of these factors may comprise “the sign of Jonah.” In short, the message of Jonah finds its culmination in the person and work of Jesus Christ. The kingdom of God that came at the advent of Jesus includes Jews and Gentiles and will stretch to the ends of the earth."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["Throughout the centuries, Jonah has been interpreted in many different ways. Because of the connections with Christ in the NT, Jonah received considerable attention from the church fathers. Theodore of Mopsuestia, for example, emphasized the similar situations of the unbelieving Jews and the prophet Jonah. Augustine saw the book as pointing forward to Christ but also representing the immaturity of the nation of Israel. Calvin viewed the book principally within the framework of a work devoted to discipline: Jonah provides an example of how God treats errant and backsliding saints. The Enlightenment brought forward the theme of universalism: God extends His mercy beyond Israel to others. In the modern period, many scholars have speculated about the nature and size of the whale or fish and have expressed skepticism that the remarkable events of this book really took place."]},{"heading":"Special Issues","content":["Some scholars have argued that the story of Jonah contains historical inaccuracies that indicate it was written as a fictional account long after the destruction of Nineveh in 612 B.C. The issues raised concern the enormous size of the city and its population, the reference to the king of Nineveh rather than the king of Assyria, and practices that are known from the later Persian period but not eighth-century Assyria (e.g., the issuing of a decree by both the king and his nobles [3:7] and animals wearing sackcloth as a sign of mourning [3:8]). However, none of these supposed inaccuracies presents a compelling reason for doubting the veracity of what is recorded, and many of them are addressed in the study notes on the book that follow."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"JONAH DISOBEDIENT AND DELIVERED","reference":"CHS. 1; 2"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"The Lord Commissions Jonah","reference":"1:1, 2"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"The Prophet Flees from the Lord","reference":"1:3"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"The Lord Pursues Jonah: The Great Storm","reference":"1:4–16"},{"level":2,"marker":"D","text":"The Lord Preserves Jonah","reference":"1:17"},{"level":2,"marker":"E","text":"Jonah’s Thanksgiving and Deliverance","reference":"ch. 2"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"JONAH OBEDIENT AND REBUKED","reference":"CHS. 3; 4"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"The Lord Commissions Jonah a Second Time","reference":"3:1, 2"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"The Prophet Responds in Obedience","reference":"3:3"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Jonah Preaches; Nineveh Repents and Is Delivered","reference":"3:4–10"},{"level":2,"marker":"D","text":"Jonah’s Anger at God’s Compassion","reference":"4:1–4"},{"level":2,"marker":"E","text":"A Lesson in Divine Love","reference":"4:5–11"}]}]}
