{"sections":[{"heading":"Author","content":["The author of this epistle identifies himself as “Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James” (v. 1). The name Judah (Gk. Judas; English Jude) was common among first-century Jews, and at least eight different individuals of that name are mentioned in the NT, including two of Jesus’ disciples (Luke 6:16). The author cannot, therefore, be identified on the basis of name alone.","The best clue to his identity is the description “brother of James” (v. 1). The only James known well enough in the early church to be referred to in this unqualified way is James the prominent church leader (Acts 12:17; 15:13), author of the epistle that bears his name, and half-brother of Jesus (Matt. 13:55; Mark 6:3; Gal. 1:19). If this identification of James is correct, the author of the present epistle is Jude the half-brother of Jesus (Matt. 13:55; Mark 6:3), who, along with his other brothers, did not believe in Jesus until after the resurrection (Mark 3:21, 31; John 7:5; Acts 1:14).","Jude might be one of those to whom Paul refers in his mention of the itinerant ministry of the Lord’s brothers and their wives (1 Cor. 9:5). If Jude was in fact the brother of Jesus, it is likely his humility that motivates him not to tell his readers that explicitly (note the similar reserve in James 1:1).","Several objections to the authenticity of Jude have been raised, but all rest on questionable assumptions or exegesis. Most are linked with proposing a date too late for Jude’s lifetime (“Date and Occasion” below). Some argue that the quality of the Greek used in this epistle is better than one could expect of a Galilean, but Galilee was no doubt bilingual (Greek and Aramaic) in the first century, and too little is known about Jude’s knowledge of the Gk. language to conclude that he could not have written this letter. Furthermore, it is quite possible that Jude used a secretary to whom he dictated the letter and who could write in a more refined Gk. style than Jude himself (as was possibly the case for Peter as well; cf. 1 Pet. 5:12).","In light of the aforementioned evidence, we may safely conclude that the author of this epistle is Jude the brother of Jesus."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["Practically the only evidence for the date of Jude is what can be inferred about the lifetime of its author and the heresy he combats. If Jude was younger than Jesus and James, as his position in the lists of brothers in Matt. 13:55 and Mark 6:3 suggests, he could have survived well into the last quarter of the first century. If we assume that Peter wrote 2 Peter, and, with most scholars, that 2 Peter used Jude (see Introduction to 2 Peter: Special Issues), then Jude would have been written before A.D. 65–67, the likely date for 2 Peter. Perhaps Jude was written as early as the mid-50s.","Some argue for a second-century date on the grounds that Jude is combatting Gnosticism. While the teachings Jude opposes may well have been precursors of Gnosticism, they cannot be identified with the fully developed Gnostic heresies of the second century (see Introduction to 2 Peter: Characteristics and Themes).","There is no indication in the letter of its place of writing or its destination. While some believe Jude’s use of the OT and Jewish apocryphal literature points to a Jewish Christian audience, this material may reveal more about his own background than that of his readers. Perhaps Jude wrote his epistle as a circular letter to a number of churches whose conditions he knew from having conducted an itinerant ministry among them (cf. 1 Cor. 9:5)."]},{"heading":"Genre and Literary Features","content":["The book of Jude is a letter, and it generally follows standard first-century epistolary conventions (see Introduction to the Epistles). It contains a standard letter opening (vv. 1, 2), body (vv. 3–23), and conclusion (vv. 24, 25). This letter strongly reflects the context of first-century Jewish Christianity, as one would expect from a Jewish-Christian author like Jude. Evidence for the author’s Jewish background includes his many allusions to the OT (though he does not quote the OT directly), his familiarity with Jewish apocryphal tradition, and his strong ethical concerns."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["Jude confronts a threat similar to that opposed in 2 Peter: false teachers who were using Christian liberty and the free grace of God as a license for immorality (v. 4; cf. 2 Pet. 2:1–3). Most of the epistle (vv. 4–19) is devoted to stern denunciation of the false teachers in order to impress upon his readers the seriousness of the threat. But Jude’s strategy is more than mere negative opposition. He urges his readers to grow in their knowledge of Christian truth (v. 20), to bear a firm witness for the truth (v. 3), and to seek to reclaim those whose faith was wavering (vv. 22, 23). This prescription for confronting spiritual error is as effective today as when it was first written."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["As does 2 Peter, Jude contains the idea of a time of tribulation in which there will be false teaching (cf. Dan. 8:17–26; 11:30–45). Verses 17, 18 introduce and quote a prophecy from Christ and the apostles (also referred to in 2 Pet. 3:2, 3, with minor differences): “In the last time there will be scoffers, following their own ungodly passions.” Much of the letter is dedicated to describing this false teaching and those who spread it (vv. 4–18). The “last time” mentioned in v. 18 is not likely only future, but had already begun in their midst. This is clear from v. 4, where the false teachers are described as those who had already “crept in unnoticed” (v. 4; cf. the present tense description of the false teachers in vv. 9–13, 16). Indeed, most commentators agree that the reason that Jude wrote this letter was to address the problem of false teaching that had already started and that the church would continue to face in the future (cf. 2 Pet. 3:17). Jude encourages the church with his reminder that the impenitent false teachers of his era would undergo a terrible judgment at the very end of the church age (v. 14, 15). Believers can be assured that this end awaits all those who pervert the gospel and never repent, regardless of the generation in which they live."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["Like Peter, Jude recalls past judgments of God in order to warn his readers of the greater judgment to come upon false teachers and other wicked people. Jude reminds his readers of the judgment of unbelievers at the exodus (v. 5) and the judgment of angels (v. 6). He points to the judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah as an example of how God will punish with eternal fire (v. 7). He compares the false teachers to those who perished in Korah’s rebellion (v. 11). In short, Jude applies the principle of 1 Cor. 10:11 to show how the judgments of the OT happened “as an example” and “for our instruction.” Jude understands that he is living before the final judgment and that God’s former judgments are but a shadow of this greater judgment to come. Because there is a final judgment yet to come, believers are to persevere (vv. 20–23), knowing that it is Jesus Christ who is able to keep them from stumbling and to present them blameless before God (vv. 24, 25)."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["Although his epistle is among the shortest books of the NT, Jude contributes much to our understanding of the person and work of Christ. In regard to the person of the Savior, the ESV translation of v. 5 states that “Jesus” delivered Israel from Egypt and destroyed unfaithful Israel in the wilderness. Normally, it would be expected that “the Lord” would be credited (as other manuscripts and translations read), but the ESV translation here reflects the best ancient manuscripts, which have the name “Jesus” instead of “the Lord.” Thus, Jude is identifying Jesus with Yahweh, the One who described in Exodus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy as delivering Israel from Egypt and judging the unbelieving Israelites in the wilderness. This apostolic understanding of the activity of the preincarnate Jesus is comparable to 1 Cor. 10:4, where Paul says that Israel was “drinking from a spiritual rock which followed them [in the wilderness], and the rock was Christ.” In any case, Jude’s description of Jesus’ work in the exodus is a strong affirmation of the deity of Christ and proof that this belief goes all the way back to the earliest Christians.","Other indications of Jude’s belief in the deity of Christ include the fact that he calls Jesus “Master and Lord” (v. 4). His omniscience, or at least His ability to foresee the future, is seen in his prediction of the coming of false teaching in the church community to whom Jude writes (vv. 17, 18), which had already begun. The end times that have been inaugurated by Christ will be consummated at His final coming, when He shows “mercy” to those who believed (v. 21; cf. v. 24). The epistle ends on a christological note: “to the only God, our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, dominion, and authority, before all time and now and forever. Amen.”","Jude also gives us insight into the work of Christ, particularly His work in preserving us in the faith. Believers’ salvation is “kept for Jesus Christ,” presumably by the reality of their effective “calling” and the “loving” power of God (v. 1). Christ “is able to keep you from stumbling, and to present you blameless before the presence of his glory with great joy” (v. 24). Jude’s short epistle, therefore, reminds us that from start to finish, salvation is granted, sustained, and consummated by Christ alone, according to the sovereign purposes of the Father and outpouring of the Holy Spirit."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["Despite its brevity, the epistle was widely used in the early church because of its obvious orthodoxy and value. Questions about its canonical status arose largely because of its use of apocryphal literature (vv. 9, 14, 15 and notes; “Special Issues” below). In addition to possible allusions in the apostolic fathers, Jude is listed in the Muratorian Canon (second century A.D.) and was accepted as authentic by Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origen (second–third centuries), and Athanasius (fourth century)."]},{"heading":"Special Issues","content":["Any discussion of the book of Jude must take into account several issues regarding its composition and sources. The most important of these include:","1. The Relationship of Jude to 2 Peter. Because Jude and 2 Peter have several concepts in common and seem to be combatting a similar heresy, many have suggested that Peter actually used Jude as a source for his second canonical epistle. A number of scholars conclude the opposite, namely that Jude used 2 Peter. For more information on the relationship between Jude and 2 Peter, see Introduction to 2 Peter: Special Issues.","2. Jude’s Use of Nonbiblical and Apocryphal Materials. As noted above, Jude’s use of apocryphal Jewish materials was the chief obstacle to the epistle’s acceptance in the NT canon. Specifically, Jude 9 seems to refer to the Assumption of Moses and Jude 14, 15 seems to incorporate material from 1 Enoch either through direct quotation or allusion. However, it is also possible that Jude does not refer to these works directly but to common traditions that were used by the authors of those works. Judaism, Protestantism, Roman Catholicism, and Eastern Orthodoxy have rejected first Enoch as canonical Scripture, although some in the Oriental Orthodox tradition consider it inspired. The Assumption of Moses is rejected by all the aforementioned ecclesiastical traditions.","Allusion to or citation of extrabiblical materials is rare in the NT. But given the currency of apocryphal religious works during the period, and the desire of the NT writers to communicate the gospel in terms familiar to their readers, it is not surprising to find some occasional use. Examples include 2 Tim. 3:8, which uses Jewish traditions about Ex. 7:11; and the quotation of pagan poets in Acts 17:28; 1 Cor. 15:33; and Titus 1:12. Certainly, Paul never would have believed that the original statements of pagan prophets were divinely inspired, but when he quoted them as part of his own speech at Athens (Acts 17:28), his use of them was inspired by God. Since all truth is God’s truth, Paul could discern where these pagans said true things and therefore use them in his defense of the gospel. The same is true of Jude and his use of extrabiblical sources. Whether Jude quotes the Assumption of Moses and 1 Enoch directly, merely alludes to those works, or cites common traditions incorporated by the writers of those books, he was able under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit to discern what was true in those works from what was false or legendary, and therefore he could appropriately use the material in his epistle.","The inclusion of such quotations in the inspired canon, whether for illustrative purposes or as an appeal to conventional wisdom, does not imply that the apocryphal and nonbiblical documents were themselves inspired or that everything in them is being endorsed by the Bible. It is the use of the particular reference that is inspired, not the source of that reference. The apostolic use of extrabiblical traditions and documents is not contrary to the inspiration of the NT, for the authors of the NT were enabled by the Lord to incorporate only that which is truth into their writings."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"OPENING EPISTOLARY GREETING","reference":"VV. 1, 2"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"BODY OF THE EPISTLE","reference":"VV. 3–23"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Purpose of the Letter","reference":"vv. 3, 4"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Denunciation of False Teachers and Exhortation to the Christian Audience","reference":"vv. 5–19"},{"level":3,"marker":"1","text":"Three OT examples of divine judgment on the ungodly","reference":"vv. 5–7"},{"level":3,"marker":"2","text":"Arrogance of the false teachers","reference":"vv. 8–10"},{"level":3,"marker":"3","text":"Three OT examples of those who led others into sin","reference":"v. 11"},{"level":3,"marker":"4","text":"Depravity and danger of the false teachers","reference":"vv. 12, 13"},{"level":3,"marker":"5","text":"Enoch’s OT prophecy of judgment","reference":"vv. 14, 15"},{"level":3,"marker":"6","text":"Proud words of the false teachers","reference":"v. 16"},{"level":3,"marker":"7","text":"Apostolic prophecies of mockers","reference":"vv. 17–19"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Positive Exhortations","reference":"vv. 20–23"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"CONCLUDING DOXOLOGY","reference":"VV. 24, 25"}]}]}
