{"sections":[{"heading":"Title","content":["In the earliest days, when books were rare and had to be committed to memory, it was customary to refer to books of the Hebrew Bible by their first word, which in this case, fittingly, is ekah, an exclamation that introduces a cry of woe. Later rabbis referred to the book as qinot (“Laments”). This title was preserved in the Septuagint, followed by the Vulgate (Lamentationes), and appears in English translations today."]},{"heading":"Author","content":["Although the book of Lamentations contains no explicit claim of authorship, it is traditionally attributed to the prophet Jeremiah. This has been true at least since the time of the Septuagint (c. 250 B.C.), in which a note about the prophet’s authorship of the book appears as a heading before the first verse. The idea of Jeremiah as the author may have been encouraged by 2 Chr. 35:25, which states that the prophet composed laments for King Josiah. The book itself contains no explicit evidence that Jeremiah is its author, although passages distinctly recall his character and language, especially ch. 3 (cf. 3:48–51 with Jer. 14:17). Thus, it is not impossible that Jeremiah wrote some, if not most, of the book of Lamentations. However, since the book consists of five different poems that vary somewhat in style and sometimes seem to be spoken by an individual (ch. 3) and sometimes by a community (ch. 5), it is possible that the poems come from different pens. This study Bible will refer to the author as “the poet” in the study notes."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["The link between Lamentations and Jeremiah is plausible not only because of similar expressions, but also because of the poems’ setting and theme. The setting is Jerusalem, during the period after the fall of the kingdom of Judah to the Babylonians in 586 B.C. and before the restoration of the exiles in 538 B.C. The lament concerning the loss of Judah’s king (2:2, 9), in distinction from other devastations of Jerusalem, fixes this occasion for the laments. A setting during the period of the Bab­ylonian exile makes Lamentations a fitting sequel to the book of Jeremiah. As Jeremiah foretold the fall of Jerusalem, Lamentations expresses the pain of the event itself. The Septuagint places Lamentations after Jeremiah, and the Christian tradition has followed that practice. In the Hebrew Bible, the book of Lamentations is found in the section of the Scriptures known as the “Writings.”"]},{"heading":"Genre and Literary Features","content":["The five chapters of the book are five poems. The most common approach to questions of genre sees these poems as laments that are like those appearing in other books of the OT, principally the book of Psalms. A unique aspect of these particular laments is that the context of distress in Lamentations is clearly that of the fallen city, whereas the context of the laments in the Psalter is often less discernible. Laments (both of the community and the individual) have certain typical characteristics, of which the most common are: (1) complaint about adversity, which the Lord either tolerated or even caused; (2) confession of trust; (3) appeal for deliverance on the grounds of the Lord’s character and His covenant; and (4) certainty of a hearing, often with an assurance that the enemies and persecutors will in turn experience the wrath of God (Ps. 74). The book of Lamentations has these typical marks, though it represents a unique set of variations upon them. Lamentations is sometimes compared with a particular kind of lament, the funeral lament (e.g., Amos 5:1–3), but it does not quite fit this category, because Jerusalem is not uniformly portrayed as “dead.”","The clearest evidence for meter in Hebrew poetry is the book of Lamentations, which seems to use a line of five beats divided three-two. This meter is called Qinah(“elegiac”), after the Hebrew name for a lament. It is most often found in poetry of this sorrowful kind.","A second poetic form found in Lamentations is the acrostic, in which lines or sets of lines are arranged according to the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. Each line or group of lines begins with the succeeding letter. This method may indicate that the poet is giving a complete treatment of the subject matter. The acrostic also provides a form for the literary expression of grief, allowing the writer to impose a kind of order on the chaos that such a terrible tragedy brings."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["The purpose of Lamentations cannot be stated in a single word. The book was composed as a way of coming to terms with the destruction of Zion. The center of gravity is the wrath of God against His people: Judah had sinned, and the prophets had pronounced God’s warning; therefore, God’s wrath is just. Long before Jerusalem’s fall, Amos had spoken of a day of the Lord against His people (Amos 5:18), a day that finally came (Lam. 1:12). Lamentations does not express total perplexity, as the book Job may appear to do at times. Instead, it justifies God’s punishment of Judah and offers a vindication of the prophets who predicted it.","Lamentations is not a work of passive resignation. God’s wrath is accepted, but not without great emotional resistance. Could God behave like the enemy of His own people, and drive them to terrors that are painful even to describe (2:4, 5, 20–22)? Although the poet understands the justice of God, the agony and bewilderment of the event can be freely expressed. The book retains its power in times of anguish and sorrow.","Yet in his anguish, the poet is able to affirm that God is still merciful and faithful (3:22–36). There is a way out of the crisis of the exile—the covenant Lord of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, whose faithfulness to the patriarchs is a continuing foundation throughout the Prophets for new appeals to Israel and Judah to put their trust in Him (e.g., Mic. 7:20). The writer of Lamentations may perhaps be counted, with Abraham, as one of the supreme examples in the OT of faith in God. Jeremiah prophesied that there would be a definite end to the Babylonian exile (Jer. 25:11). The poet looks for such an end, and even hopes that Judah’s enemies will be judged for their crimes against her. In this hope, there is an understanding of the sovereignty of God over all the nations, the sovereignty that embraces all mysteries (3:37–39)."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["The central passage in the book affirms God’s covenant faithfulness (hesed) in the midst of the surrounding devastation (3:22–24). God is not distant from His people in their suffering, nor has He completely abandoned them, even though their sins are great and might merit such a fate. As the poet publicly confesses the sins of his people, he hopes that through such confession and repentance the people will be restored to God’s favor and thus to a new future (ch. 5). This is his only hope: there is no salvation to be sought or found in any other source, for the Lord alone is his portion (3:24). There is thus a movement within the book, as there is in most biblical laments, from the expression of terrible loss and pain to restored hope and prayer for renewal."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["The book of Lamentations echoes the form and the terminology of the psalms of lament. Like the writers of those psalms, this poet is experiencing a time of judgment: the Lord has turned His face away from His people because of their sins. Yet Lamentations is the longest, deepest, and most profound lament in the Bible because it is a response to the deepest and most profound act of judgment by the Lord on His own people—the destruction of Jerusalem. This terrible disaster also helped shape the book of Psalms (e.g., Pss. 74; 137) as well as the writings of the prophets of the time (such as Jeremiah and Ezekiel), but the book of Lamentations is perhaps the fullest and most significant response to this pivotal event in biblical history."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["Jesus voiced His own lament over Jerusalem during the days leading up to His rejection by His own people (Matt. 23:37–39; Luke 13:34, 35). He foresaw terrible consequences for Jerusalem because of that rejection (Matt. 24). Yet He Himself also uttered His own cry of abandonment as He endured the mystery of His redemptive suffering in our place (Matt. 27:46). His death on the cross is the ultimate expression of the covenant faithfulness of God that is new every morning and enables lost sinners to be restored to God’s favor. The solemnity and compassion of Christ’s words express the goodness and severity of God that undergirds the gospel (Rom. 11:22, 23).","The book of Lamentations thus points beyond the humiliation and restoration of Jerusalem to the humiliation and exaltation of Christ. In beholding the life and work of Christ, the world can know that God is good and that He will do good in His time “to the soul who seeks him” (3:25)."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["In Jewish tradition, portions of Lamentations are read annually on the ninth of Av (July–August), when Jews recall the destruction of Jerusalem in 586 B.C. as well as that of the second temple in A.D. 70. It marks an annual reminder of God’s justice and compassion: He is determined to punish sin, but He offers assurance that His covenant mercy remains new each day.","Christian tradition, by contrast, has often neglected the book, along with the broader practice of lament. There is no surviving commentary on the book from before the ninth century A.D., although the church fathers cited individual verses. Perhaps this is due to seeing the book primarily as a historical artifact rather than a vital piece of theological engagement. In more recent times, however, it has been valued for its significance in helping individuals and communities explore an appropriate response to deeply traumatic personal circumstances. The caveat, of course, is that our experiences of pain and loss may be significantly different from the poet’s pain over the fall of Jerusalem. Yet there are lessons to be learned, both individually and corporately, about how we should mourn over tragic events, especially when we connect the book with Jesus’ suffering and pain in our place."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"JERUSALEM ONCE GREAT BUT NOW DEVASTATED","reference":"CH. 1"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"THE LORD’S ANGER WITH JUDAH","reference":"CH. 2"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"THE COMMUNITY’S GRIEF","reference":"CH. 3"},{"level":1,"marker":"IV","text":"ZION’S DEGRADATION","reference":"CH. 4"},{"level":1,"marker":"V","text":"DISASTER AND PETITION FOR RESTORATION","reference":"CH. 5"}]}]}
