{"sections":[{"heading":"Title","content":["By the middle of the second century, the ancient church referred to Matthew and the other three canonical accounts of Jesus’ life as “the gospel according to [various authors],” following the lead of the second gospel (see Introduction to Mark). Thus, the title in our English versions has ancient precedent. Its implication is that all four canonical gospels convey one message of good news through (“according to”) four inspired authors.","The opening words of this document, “The book of the genealogy [biblos geneseōs] of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham,” are not precisely a title for either the whole document or for the first seventeen verses. Rather, they highlight this book’s connection with the first book of Moses, in Hebrew called “In the Beginning” but in Greek titled “Genesis” (generation or genealogy). Gen. 2:4 and 5:1 are the only two places in the Septuagint where the phrase biblos geneseōs occurs. Matthew’s use of this phrase appears to be an intentional allusion to these two statements in the book of Genesis. Matthew is narrating the record of the new creation, launched by the coming, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ."]},{"heading":"Author","content":["Although many scholars believe that this gospel did not originally name its author, early manuscripts have the inscription “according to Matthew,” and Eusebius tells us that the early church father Papias spoke of Matthew as having arranged the “oracles” about Jesus. Subsequent tradition is unanimous that the disciple Matthew, also called Levi (9:9–13; Mark 2:13–17), was the author of this gospel, and not until the eighteenth century was this tradition doubted.","The significance of Papias’s statement for the authorship of this gospel is debated. Papias is commonly understood to affirm that Matthew “arranged the oracles in the Hebrew dialect” (that is, in the Hebrew or Aramaic language), but our canonical gospel, which is in Greek, does not read like a translation from these languages. It is also quite similar to Mark (see Introduction to the Gospels and Acts), which was certainly written in Greek. Possibly Matthew wrote in both Hebrew (or Aramaic) and Greek, as Calvin wrote works in both Latin and French. As a tax collector operating in Galilee and interacting with Jewish subjects and Roman officials, Matthew would have been bilingual or even trilingual (Aramaic, Greek, Latin). Others have suggested that Papias meant “in a Semitic style,” referring not to the work’s language but to its literary genre and narrative approach.","Some have identified Papias’s “oracles” as a source lying behind our gospels. But Eusebius appears to have understood “oracles” to mean “gospel,” and Irenaeus (writing c. A.D. 180) speaks of a “gospel” by Matthew written “for the Hebrews in their own dialect.”","Other objections to Matthew’s authorship are more speculative. Some suggest that the gospel may have been the product of a group of writers (a school). Its alleged dependence on Mark and supposedly late composition (see Date and Occasion) are given as reasons to doubt Matthew’s authorship. But these objections do not disprove the tradition that Matthew was the author. Moreover, if the tradition of Matthew’s authorship is not reliable, it is hard to explain how this masterpiece of inspired apostolic witness to the Messiah came to be identified with a minor member of the Twelve, especially one whose collaboration with Rome would have cast doubt on his credentials in the minds of Jewish readers."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["The earliest reference to the gospel of Matthew is probably in the Epistle to the Smyrnaeans by Ignatius of Antioch (c. A.D. 110). Almost no one dates this gospel later than A.D. 100. Some scholars have dated it as early as A.D. 50, but many critics date it after the destruction of Jerusalem in A.D. 70, usually between the years 80 and 100. Their reasons include the assumption that Jesus could not have predicted such future events as the destruction of Jerusalem; the view that the gospel’s Trinitarian theology (28:19) and exalted Christology (11:27) are late ideas that developed in a Hellenistic environment; and the assertion that the word rabbi (23:5–10) was not used as a title before A.D. 70.","Some of these reasons, such as that Jesus could not have predicted the future or that a high Christology is Hellenistic and therefore late, reflect an a priori rejection of the possibility of supernatural revelation and are therefore highly dubious. Trinitarian formulas appear in such epistles as 2 Corinthians (13:14), universally acknowledged to have been written in the mid-first century. Further, evidence in the book suggests that it was addressed to the historical situation before the destruction of Jerusalem in A.D. 70. The gospel warns against the Sadducees (16:6, 11; 22:23–32), a group that rapidly vanished after A.D. 70. The language used to describe the destruction of Jerusalem in ch. 24 reflects Old Testament prophecies of the divine judgment that Jesus foresaw as connected with the coming of His kingdom. There is no need to explain the content of ch. 24 as the author’s description of a past event. Moreover, the assertion that the title rabbi was not used before A.D. 70 presupposes that which must be proven, namely, that Matthew must be written after that date. After all, if Matthew or any of the rest of the gospels were written before the year 70, then they are sources that prove the use of that title before that time. There are also many indications that the assertion that no one used the title rabbi before that date are greatly overstated.","The writer of this gospel may have used the gospel of Mark as a source. Assuming that Mark was composed to preserve the oral testimony of the apostle Peter in Rome, an appropriate date for Matthew would be between A.D. 64 and 70.","Antioch in Syria is the most likely location for the writing of the gospel and for the church for which it was originally composed. Ignatius, the earliest writer to quote Matthew, was bishop of Antioch. The congregation in Antioch was of mixed Jewish and Gentile origin (Acts 11:20–26; 15:1–5). This would account for the problems of legalism and antinomianism that Matthew particularly addresses and for the fact that this very “Jewish” gospel, which stresses Jesus’ fulfillment of the Old Testament, also emphasizes the inclusion of the Gentiles in the Messiah’s kingdom of grace (2:1–12; 8:5–13; 28:18)."]},{"heading":"Genre","content":["Each of the four canonical Gospels was written to convey authentic and authoritative teaching by and about Jesus, whose coming signaled the fulfillment of God’s promises and the arrival of God’s kingdom. Matthew stands in the biblical tradition of Moses and the Hebrew “former prophets” who authored the books of Samuel and Kings, bearing witness to God’s acts in redemptive history and drawing implications from those acts for the response of God’s people. Like the prophetic authors of the Old Testament Historical Books, Matthew makes no division between history and theology. History is the basis of theology, and theology interprets the meaning of historical events. He speaks truth about real events in history, and he does so with a spiritual, pastoral, and covenantal agenda.","The authors of the four Gospels did not intend to write complete biographies that would fulfill modern expectations. Like Luke, Matthew opens his account with the narrative of the Savior’s birth from a virgin, in fulfillment of prophecy (chs. 1; 2). His account of John the Baptist’s ministry of preparation and Jesus’ baptism and temptation (chs. 3; 4) is followed by a selective record of Jesus’ ministry of authoritative teaching and miraculous deeds (chs. 5–20), leading to an extended narrative of the week of controversy and intrigue that ended in Jesus’ crucifixion and resurrection (chs. 21–28). The apparently inordinate proportion of each gospel devoted to the final week of Jesus’ earthly life in humiliation shows that this genre was designed to focus readers’ attention on the sacrifice and triumphant resurrection by which the Messiah defeated Satan and inaugurated God’s kingdom."]},{"heading":"Literary Features","content":["The opening and closing of Matthew’s gospel emphasize that Jesus is the fulfillment of God’s promises to Israel. Jesus is “the son of David, the son of Abraham” (1:1), identifications that are supported by Jesus’ genealogical descent from Abraham through David (1:2–17). Jesus’ genealogy echoes not only a repeated feature throughout Genesis but also the genealogies that open 1 Chronicles and focus attention on King David. The Great Commission at the gospel’s end echoes God’s promise to Abraham that “all nations” will be blessed in Abraham’s seed.","Matthew uses two distinctive constructions to mark off significant transitional points in his narrative. First, the “seam” between the preparatory account of Jesus’ birth, baptism by John, and temptation and the launch of His public messianic ministry is shown in the formula “from that time Jesus began to preach” (4:17). Later, a transition in the focus of His teaching to His disciples is signaled by “from that time Jesus began to show” them the necessity of His impending rejection and suffering (16:21), immediately after Peter’s confession that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God.","Second, a repeated formula closes each of Jesus’ five major instructional discourses: “When Jesus finished ... [sayings, instructions, parables, etc.].” The discourses concern kingdom ethics (chs. 5–7), discipleship and mission (ch. 10), parables of the kingdom (ch. 13), relationships in the church (ch. 18), and the end time (ch. 24). Although it is hard to align the content of these five discourses one to one with the five books of Moses, Matthew may have intended their number to reinforce the theme that Jesus is the promised prophet like Moses (Deut. 18:18). There may be a relationship between each discourse and the narrative preceding it. The narrative portions deal primarily with the question of the king’s identity, while the discourses focus on the king’s people.","A comparison of the gospels of Matthew and Mark reveals that Matthew included much of Jesus’ teaching material that is not present in Mark, while abbreviating accounts of Jesus’ miraculous deeds and interactions with people."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["Matthew makes extensive use of “fulfillment” references to the Old Testament. His citations are not presented as isolated predictions and fulfillments but as proof of the fulfillment of all the expectations of the Old Testament. This concern affects the way Matthew emphasizes certain elements in history; for example, Matthew shows the illegality of the Sanhedrin’s actions in the trial of Jesus (26:57–68), the distortion of the Old Testament by the scribes and Pharisees (15:1–9), and the covenantal nature of God’s dealing with His people (1:1; 21:33–44; 26:26–29).","In addition to showing Jewish readers that God’s covenant with Israel has been fulfilled in Jesus, Matthew reminds them that this covenant had always been directed toward blessing for all nations, as the Lord had promised Abraham (Gen. 12:3). Women with Gentile associations are named in the genealogy of Jesus, “the son of Abraham” (1:1, 3, 5, 6). Magi, non-Jewish astrologers, come from the east to worship the one “born king of the Jews” (2:1–18). The risen Messiah commissions His followers to “make disciples of all nations” (28:18)."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["Central to Matthew’s theology is the theme that Jesus is the promised Davidic King who has come to redeem His people and establish His kingdom of righteousness. From the opening identification of Jesus as “the son of David, the son of Abraham” to the opening message of repentance in the light of the kingdom’s arrival (4:17) to the end of the gospel, Matthew argues that Jesus fulfills Old Testament prophecies, institutions, offices, landmark events, and other anticipatory patterns in Israel’s history.","In this time between the first and second comings of Christ, the kingdom of God comes in a partial way—good and evil grow up side by side until the judgment; men and women looking for permanent value find it in the kingdom; the preaching of the message of the kingdom will be received by some and rejected by others (Matt 13). However, Jesus establishes His church as the fullest manifestation of the kingdom in this present age.","Jesus calls His followers—His church—to deep integrity and sincere worship of the Father, who sees our hearts’ secrets; to costly discipleship; to compassion toward outcasts; and to become a community characterized by purity and peacemaking. As the church lives by the ethics of the kingdom, it serves as a witness to the world around it, salt and light in a culture that needs the King. As the church proclaims the message of the kingdom, it has the promise of Jesus’ own presence and the expectation that He will return to set the world right and usher in the final form of His kingdom."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["Matthew and the other three gospels function for the NT much as the five books of Moses function for the OT. As historical prologues leading up to the inauguration of covenants, they narrate the Lord’s redemptive intervention to rescue His chosen people and then engage them through promise and command. The covenants with Abraham (Genesis) and through Moses (Exodus–Deuteronomy) established God’s bond with Israel, and Jesus inaugurates the new cov­enant with a new Israel, gathered from all the nations. As in the books of Moses, the Lord’s deeds of power and grace to initiate His covenant with His people set the context for His directions for their communal life, as we see exemplified in Jesus’ discourses in Matthew on life in the kingdom of heaven.","The opening and closing words of Matthew locate the good news within the redemptive history narrated in the Old and New Testament Scriptures. In Matt. 1:1, “genealogy” recalls Genesis. In the beginning, the first man, Adam, received authority over other creatures. Through His obedience, death, and resurrection, Jesus, the Son of Man, now has all authority in heaven and earth (28:18). Jesus is “the son of Abraham” (1:1), who brings blessing to “all nations” (28:19). Jesus is “the son of David” (1:1), the king who “comes in the name of the Lord” (21:5, 9) to inaugurate the long-awaited kingdom of heaven (4:17). Fulfilling the prophetic promise of “God with us” (1:23), Jesus will be with His church “always, to the end of the age” (28:20)."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["The issue of Jesus’ identity is addressed repeatedly throughout Matthew. The very first verse declares Christ to be the son of David and the son of Abraham. This immediately draws the reader’s attention to Christ as the fulfillment of the covenant made with David (2 Sam. 7; cf. Ps. 110) and of the covenant made with Abraham (Gen. 12; 15).","The deity of Christ is revealed as early as 1:23, where Matthew cites Isaiah’s prophecy that the virgin’s son will be called “God with us.” The Father’s voice from heaven at Jesus’ baptism and His transfiguration identify Him as God’s well-pleasing Son, demonstrating the God-given truth of Simon Peter’s confession, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God” (16:17). Jesus’ correction of traditional interpretations of God’s law, introduced with the striking phrase, “But I say to you,” exhibits an authority transcending anything appropriate to mere humans (7:28, 29). As Israel’s Lord constituted that people as His assembly (ekklēsia) at Sinai, so Jesus promises to build “my church” (ekklēsia; 16:18).","Christ is also truly human, the perfect fulfillment of humanity’s role as covenant servant to the Lord. Though Himself sinless, He identified with sinful people by submitting to John’s baptism of repentance. After a forty-day fast in the wilderness, Jesus was hungry. His victory over the ensuing temptations show Him to be the faithful servant that Israel had failed to be. He slept in the midst of a great storm at sea—displaying His humanity—and then quelled the winds and sea with a word—displaying His divinity.","Christ’s royal calling as son of David is prominent in Matthew’s portrayal of Jesus, but so also is His prophetic authority to speak God’s word, even as Moses and Elijah had done."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["For most of church history, it was assumed that Matthew’s was the first of the four Gospels to be written and that its similarities to the other Synoptic Gospels were explainable in terms of the dependence of Mark and Luke on Matthew. Many scholars today believe that both Matthew and Luke made use of the gospel of Mark in writing their own gospels (see Introduction to the Gospels and Acts). However, Matthew and Luke do not follow Mark at every point in the order of events of Jesus’ life or teachings. Matthew and Luke share some material not found in Mark, but here, too, they differ in its placement within Jesus’ ministry.","To understand the chronology of the Gospels, it is important to note that Mark’s own account is not a complete diary but, like the rest of the Gospels, a God-inspired presentation of that which his original audience most needed to know. John reports that Jesus visited Jerusalem several times during a period of about three years, while in Mark a single, climactic visit to Jerusalem is recorded. Matthew and Luke similarly were led by the Spirit in their selection and presentation of events. Recording certain events and not others and arranging material thematically instead of chronologically are both consistent with the Holy Spirit’s and the Gospel authors’ purposes to preserve authentic eyewitness testimony and to show its implications for their readers’ faith and lives.","The Gospels do not simply present a schedule of Jesus’ activities. Nor are they modern, technical biographies. The Synoptic Gospels are individual and complementary works; they are not three incomplete attempts to do the same task. They are, as Mark’s opening sentence shows, “good news,” namely, proclamations of God’s climactic redemptive act in history in Jesus the Christ, the Son of God, written to call people into covenant with their creator by His grace. Together with the gospel of John, they present Jesus Christ, the incarnate Word, to all generations."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"THE GENESIS OF JESUS CHRIST","reference":"1:1–4:11"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Beginnings: Genealogy (Genesis) and Birth (Genesis)","reference":"ch. 1"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Exodus and Exile of God’s Son","reference":"ch. 2"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Baptism and Temptation of God’s Son","reference":"3:1–4:11"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"JESUS CHRIST’S PROCLAMATION OF THE KINGDOM","reference":"4:12–16:20"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Jesus’ Teaching in Galilee of the Gentiles","reference":"4:12–25"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"The Law of Christ’s Rule: Sermon on the Mount","reference":"First Discourse; chs. 5–7"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Power of Christ’s Rule in Rescue","reference":"8:1–9:8"},{"level":2,"marker":"D","text":"Commissioning of Disciples","reference":"Second Discourse; 9:1–10:42"},{"level":2,"marker":"E","text":"Seeing the Signs of Christ’s Rule","reference":"11:1–12:50"},{"level":2,"marker":"F","text":"Parables of Christ’s Rule","reference":"Third Discourse; 13:1–53"},{"level":2,"marker":"G","text":"Responses to Christ’s Rule","reference":"13:54–16:12"},{"level":2,"marker":"H","text":"Confession of Christ’s Identity","reference":"16:13–20"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"REVELATION OF JESUS CHRIST’S SUFFERING","reference":"16:21–25:46"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"The Coming Suffering and Glory","reference":"16:21–17:27"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Conduct in Christ’s Kingdom","reference":"Fourth Discourse; ch. 18"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Ways of Approaching Jesus","reference":"19:1–20:16"},{"level":2,"marker":"D","text":"Leadership in the Kingdom","reference":"20:17–28"},{"level":2,"marker":"E","text":"Acts of the Son of David","reference":"20:29–21:22"},{"level":2,"marker":"F","text":"Controversies over Authority","reference":"21:23–23:39"},{"level":2,"marker":"G","text":"Announcements of Coming Judgment","reference":"Fifth Discourse; chs. 24; 25"},{"level":1,"marker":"IV","text":"JESUS CHRIST’S DEATH AND RESURRECTION","reference":"CHS. 26-28"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Preparations","reference":"26:1–16"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Last Supper","reference":"26:17–35"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Gethsemene","reference":"26:36–56"},{"level":2,"marker":"D","text":"Trials","reference":"26:57–27:31"},{"level":2,"marker":"E","text":"Crucifixion","reference":"27:32–50"},{"level":2,"marker":"F","text":"Death and its Effects","reference":"27:51–56"},{"level":2,"marker":"G","text":"Burial","reference":"27:57–66"},{"level":2,"marker":"H","text":"Resurrection","reference":"ch. 28"}]}]}
