{"sections":[{"heading":"Title and Author","content":["The book is designated after its author, Nahum, whose name means “comfort,” possibly reflecting the comfort of his message to those suffering under Assyrian domination. His name is followed by “of Elkosh,” probably a reference to the location of his birth or the place where he prophesied. Attempts to identify Elkosh have been unsuccessful. Proposals have included locations near ancient Nineveh (with Nahum descended from the Israelites who were deported there earlier), in Galilee (the name “Capernaum” perhaps derives from the Hebrew for “village of Nahum”), and in Judah. The internal witness of the book supports Judah as the general vicinity of Nahum’s prophetic activity (1:15). However, as with most prophetic books, the message of the work, though rooted in the person and circumstances of the prophet, finally transcends the author and his ministry."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["Nahum’s prophecy can be dated between the capture of Thebes by the Assyrian ruler Ashurbanipal in 663 B.C., which Nahum reports as a past event (3:8), and the fall of Nineveh in 612 B.C., which Nahum prophetically foretells (3:5–7).","During this period of the seventh century B.C., two major crises arose in the Assyrian empire. One came from the threat of the Medes and the advancing Scythians (642–638 B.C.). The other, larger crisis was the Babylonian revolt (652–648 B.C.) under the leadership of Ashurbanipal’s elder brother Shamash-shum-ukin, who was supported by the Elamites and peoples from the Iranian highlands. Ripple effects of this revolt were experienced as far away as Palestine and Syria. Eventually the revolt was suppressed by bitter warfare that shook the whole empire. A date for Nahum’s prophetic activities before or during this period of upheaval is attractive. Because the destruction of Thebes was apparently still fresh in the memory of his audience, a plausible date for Nahum’s prophecy therefore falls between 660 and 650 B.C., in the days of King Manasseh of Judah, who was a loyal vassal of Assyria. Another possibility is the early part of Josiah’s reign, before the death of Ashurban­ipal in 627 B.C."]},{"heading":"Genre","content":["Nahum has been incorrectly regarded as a narrow nationalist who, inspired by feelings of hatred and vengeance, proclaimed a message of judgment against Nineveh, and at the same time extended the promise of unconditional salvation to his own people, Judah. But this view overlooks the fact that this book reflects the usual literary form of prophecies against foreign nations and is to be compared with similar proclamations in Is. 13–23; Jer. 46–51; Amos 1; 2; and Obadiah.","A number of literary genres are evident in Nahum, such as a hymn (1:2–8) and the salvation oracle of 1:12–15, which yields a brief glimpse of a brighter future for Judah. However, the book is dominated by oracles of judgment. Taunt songs, ostensibly addressed to Nineveh (2:11–13; 3:14–17), mock it as the “bloody city” (3:1), soon to meet its doom at the hands of unnamed foes. These oracles were in fact designed for the ears of Judah as it suffered under Assyrian oppression."]},{"heading":"Literary Features","content":["The prophecy has a simple structure. In chapter 1 there is a build-up to the ensuing conflict that is described in chapters 2 and 3. Nahum describes the destruction divinely disclosed to him with a vivid, staccato rhythm that rivals an account of a war reporter. He pursues his theme of the impending doom of Nineveh with unrelenting tenacity, using poetic language and imagery of the highest order. Implicitly, Nahum voices the universal relief and joy of all who suffered under the merciless tyrant."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["The book of Nahum has a double title (1:1). It is called an “oracle concerning Nineveh” and the “book of the vision of Nahum.” “Oracle” often indicates a divine message of judgment against a foreign nation (Is. 13:1; Mal. 1:1 note). “Vision” refers to a supernatural revelation to the prophet’s inner sight or hearing. At times a prophet was instructed to write down a specific message (Is. 8:1, 2; 30:8) or even “all the words” that the Lord required him to speak (Jer. 36). The written form then provided a strong additional witness to the certainty of the fulfillment of those divine pronouncements. The prophecy’s double title is solid confirmation of the authenticity of this oracle of doom against Nineveh and the inescapability of God’s imminent judgment on the Assyrian kingdom.","As a true prophet of Yahweh, Nahum was profoundly aware that the Lord, the incomparable and all-powerful God, held universal dominion over the kingdoms of this world. This often neglected and disparaged book provides us with an important key for understanding past, present, and future history. Events do not occur as mere happenstance, but every particular of history is divinely determined. In the opening hymn (1:2–8) and especially in 1:2, 3 (the “text” of Nahum’s sermon), we learn that the Lord’s government of history is in accordance with His character as the covenant God. He demands undivided submission everywhere and from everyone. Rejection of Him and of His law leads not only to the necessary consequences of chaos in society and in nature, but inevitably evokes His personal displeasure, resulting in just retribution."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["God’s patience (1:3) must never be misunderstood as weakness. Corporate or individual sin will not be left unpunished. God ultimately ordains all the events of history, and He is sovereign over all nations. Nahum proclaimed the impending destruction of Nineveh as God’s righteous judgment, and he invited his people to a joyful celebration of this event long before it took place.","Nineveh was a wicked, imperialistic, and deceitful metropolis with an arrogant and unscrupulous lust for power and domination manifested in merciless warmongering (3:1–4). In addition to its military exploits, Nineveh was condemned for its ruthless trade practices and insatiable materialism (3:16). Against this evil city, Nahum delivered the message that no earthly power that defied God’s law would finally escape His judgment (1:14; 3:5–7). For his original audience and all subsequent readers, Nahum vividly portrayed the wrath of God, whose way is in the “whirlwind and storm” (1:3). This same book declares the goodness of God (1:7).","Judgment, however, is not the Lord’s final word through Nahum. God’s retributive judgment is also redemptive; it furthers His loving purposes for His people and His covenant promises to them (1:15; 2:2). He destroys the forces of evil with the purpose of creating a new world of freedom (1:13), peace, and lasting comfort. “He knows those who take refuge in Him” and cares for them (1:7)."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["In many respects, Nahum provides a sequel to the prophecy of Jonah, which Nahum immediately follows in the ordering of the Minor Prophets in the Septuagint (Eastern Orthodox churches follow this ordering as well). When Jonah prophesied more than a century earlier, the Lord extended mercy to the repentant city of Nineveh, much to the prophet’s chagrin. But it was not long until Assyria again adopted an expansionist policy characterized by ruthless cruelty, attested to both by subject nations and by Assyrian records of the torture and mutilation the Assyrians inflicted. Consequently, the city again fell under divine condemnation. God had used the Assyrians to punish Israel and Judah (Is. 10:5), but His aim was not to annihilate Judah. The Assyrians went too far, and their arrogance would lead to their just reward (Is. 10:12). The predicted downfall of Nineveh provides the scenario for the preservation of a remnant of God’s people until the coming of the Messiah.","Although the impending judgment of God is a major theme of New Testament theology, Nahum is not quoted explicitly. The reference in Rom. 10:15 is more probably to Is. 52:7 than to Nah. 1:15."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["There are no direct messianic references in Nahum. However, the exhortation to “keep your feasts” (1:15) encouraged the faithful in the land of Judah to look forward to the One who would fulfill all that was symbolized in the festivals. Those familiar with the message in the “book of the vision of Nahum” will better understand the necessity of the cross of Jesus Christ, the Son of the jealous and avenging God. They will be able to proclaim from this book the glorified Christ, to whom all authority in heaven and on earth has been given (Matt. 28:18) and who is now guiding history toward that great day when He will hand over the kingdom to His Father, after He has destroyed all opposing powers, so “that God may be all in all” (1 Cor. 15:24–28)."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["Among the Dead Sea Scrolls that were the possession of the Qumran community, there is a commentary that identifies parallels between the overthrow of oppression anticipated by Nahum and that which the community anticipated for their contemporary circumstances (first century B.C.). Early Christian commentators generally followed the lead of the Septuagint and interpreted Nahum in the light of Jonah. At the time of the Reformation, both Martin Luther and John Calvin discussed the shallowness of Nineveh’s earlier repentance and the justice of God’s penalty imposed on the city.","Many modern commentators argue that Nahum portrays a narrow, nationalistic spirit that ignores the deficiencies of his own nation and which depicts God as unworthily sanctioning and approving unbridled violence. This, however, is to ignore God’s triumph over tyranny and unbridled wickedness, as well as the repeated warnings to Israel throughout the Old Testament of God’s willingness to judge His own people. Nahum conveys an enduring warning to all earthly regimes that ignore their accountability to the Judge of all the earth."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"SUPERSCRIPTION","reference":"1:1"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"NINEVEH’S JUST AND MERCIFUL JUDGE","reference":"1:2–14"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"The Lord’s Jealousy and Power","reference":"1:2–8"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Woe for the Wicked","reference":"1:9–14"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"NINEVEH POWERLESS BEFORE THE LORD’S ARMY","reference":"1:15–2:13"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Good News for Judah","reference":"1:15–2:2"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Nineveh Captured and Plundered","reference":"2:3–10"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"Nineveh’s Power Broken by the Lord","reference":"2:11–13"},{"level":1,"marker":"IV","text":"NINEVEH’S IRREVERSIBLE DESTRUCTION","reference":"CH. 3"},{"level":2,"marker":"A","text":"Judgment of the Wicked City Prophesied","reference":"3:1–7"},{"level":2,"marker":"B","text":"Nineveh’s Fate Like That of Thebes","reference":"3:8–11"},{"level":2,"marker":"C","text":"The Finality of Divine Judgment","reference":"3:12–19"}]}]}
