{"sections":[{"heading":"Title and Author","content":["The apostle Paul wrote the letter to Philemon. Its authenticity as a Pauline epistle has not been seriously challenged."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["The letter was written while Paul was in prison in Rome (c. A.D. 60) and was probably sent to Philemon together with the letter to the Colossians. Philemon was a Christian brother and slaveholder in Colossae. His slave Onesimus had run away and had somehow met Paul in Rome. Through Paul’s teaching, Onesimus had become a Christian.","Paul’s purpose in writing was to ask Philemon to spare Onesimus’s life and to receive Onesimus back not as merely a slave but also as a Christian brother. Paul even hints that he would be pleased if Philemon were to voluntarily return Onesimus to render valuable assistance to Paul (vv. 12, 13, 20, 21). In pursuit of this goal, Paul barely restrains himself from demanding the favor. He writes as powerful an appeal as he can, even offering to repay Onesimus’s debts, if any, to the master whom he had wronged."]},{"heading":"Genre","content":["The book of Philemon is a letter, and it generally follows standard first-century epistolary conventions (see “Introduction to the Epistles”). It contains a standard letter opening (vv. 1–7), body (vv. 8–22), and conclusion (vv. 23–25). It is the shortest of Paul’s epistles, with only 335 words in the Greek text. Like the Pastoral Epistles (1 and 2 Timothy, Titus), Paul’s letter to Philemon is a personal letter. Also like those letters, Philemon is not only a personal letter. Paul addresses it also to “the church in your [Philemon’s] house” (v. 2)."]},{"heading":"Literary Features","content":["This letter is a model of understated persuasion, a tacit appeal to apply the grace of the gospel to an interpersonal relationship in which serious wrong has been committed by Onesimus. Paul is seeking from Philemon, at the very least, clemency for Ones­imus, whom he is sending back to Philemon (see “Date and Occasion” above). He does not expressly command Philemon to do anything (v. 8), but he appeals to Philemon “for love’s sake” (v. 9). Much of this letter consists of that appeal. Paul reminds Philemon of the spiritual benefit that he and the church have received from Philemon’s faith and love (vv. 4–7), of Paul’s own old age and imprisonment (v. 9), of his own affection for and confidence in Onesimus (vv.10–16), of his own willingness to rectify any past wrongs committed by Onesimus (vv. 17–19), and his role in Philemon’s salvation (v. 19)—a debt that Philemon could acknowledge by “refreshing” Paul’s “heart” (that is, Onesimus; v. 12) in Christ (v. 20). He concludes with a note of confidence that Philemon will act in accordance with Paul’s counsel (vv. 21, 22).","Paul carefully selects his words to help advance or to underscore his argument in the letter. The Gk. words translated “sharing” (v. 6) and “partner” (v. 17) come from the same root. This form of repetition helps to underscore an important concern of Paul in this letter: the communion or fellowship that believers have with one another. Paul also capitalizes on the meaning of Onesimus’s name (“useful”). At v. 11, he informs Philemon that “formerly he was useless to you, but now he is indeed useful to you and to me.”"]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["Philemon shows the apostle using all his personal force to bring about a Christian answer to a very serious problem. Paul’s judgment appears to be that Philemon should show mercy to the offending slave, for the sake of Christian love toward a fellow Christian. Paul’s letter is passionate but carefully composed to achieve the desired end. The document was written in his own hand (v. 19), and is much more than an example of rhetoric. It brings us close to Paul’s ministry, so that we can practically feel his profound desire to make Christian love the first rule of human action."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["Philemon makes two important theological points. First, Paul makes a gracious offer in v. 18: “if he has wronged you at all, or owes you anything, charge that to my account.” He is willing to assume the consequences for Onesimus’s actions and to make satisfaction to Philemon. This offer is a picture of the way in which God has reconciled sinners to Himself in Christ. Although we offended God by our sins against Him and His law, He in mercy sent His beloved Son to bear the penalty for our sins in order that we might be restored to fellowship with Him. Our relationship with one another should reflect God’s mercy in Christ to us.","Second, in v. 16, Paul urges Philemon to receive Onesimus “no longer as a slave but more than a slave, as a beloved brother—especially to me, but how much more to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord.” Paul is not suggesting that Onesimus will no longer be a slave upon his return, but that to Philemon he will be “more than a slave,” that is, a “beloved brother ... in the Lord.” When we become Christians, we do not cease being parents, spouses, employees, etc. But the gospel radically transforms our relationships with the people in our lives. Paul makes essentially the same nuanced point when he reminds slave owners that they answer to the same heavenly Master as do their believing slaves (Eph. 6:9; Col. 4:1). But in vv. 15, 16, Paul says that Onesimus’s Christian identity is greater than his slave identity, which appears to suggest a notion of emancipation (cf. the note on vv. 15, 16 and “History of Interpretation” below)."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["When man fell into sin, that fall had profound consequences for human relationships (Gen. 3:16–19). But the grace of God bears upon and transforms relationships among fellow believers, a fact that both the OT and the NT teach. Philemon’s life had been one that had “refreshed ... the hearts of the saints,” and this fact brought “joy and comfort” to the heart of Paul (v. 7). In this letter, Paul invites Philemon to seek restoration with a Christian brother who had offended him. In so doing, Paul says, he will “refresh [Paul’s] heart in Christ” (v. 20) and undoubtedly those of the church that met in his house (v. 2)."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["Paul makes clear throughout this letter that what distinguishes and characterizes the fellowship of believers is the “grace” and “peace” that come from “God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ” (v. 3, cf. v. 25). Paul’s appeals to Philemon are grounded on the saving mercies of Christ in which they both share (vv. 16, 20). What makes Onesimus, formerly useless, now useful (v. 12) is the intervention of Christ’s grace (v. 10). While the objective work of Christ for believers is not in the foreground in Philemon, its application by the Spirit to the lives of believers is."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["Over the last two centuries, the Bible’s teaching on slavery has come under particular scrutiny, especially as the Western world has witnessed the welcome abolition of the chattel slavery of its recent past. Some have appealed to Philemon as indication that the New Testament commands the abolition of slavery. Care needs to be taken in assessing this claim. Scripture is clear that slavery was not instituted at creation, and will not be part of life in the new heavens and the new earth. Slavery only entered into human experience after the fall. Both the OT and the NT regulate slavery in order to ameliorate its effects, not unlike the way that the Scripture regulates divorce to the same purpose. In doing so, it regards neither slavery nor divorce to be a positive good. Paul, at many points in his letters, gives instructions to both Christian slave owners and Christian slaves (1 Cor. 7:17–24; Eph. 6:5–9; Col. 3:22–4:1; 1 Tim 6:1, 2; Titus 2:9, 10). He does not insist upon immediate abolition, but he does indicate that the gospel must thoroughly transform the relationship between a Christian slave owner and a Christian slave. Emancipation would certainly be a legitimate option for the slave owner and one that Paul implicitly commends to Philemon, and Christians have taken leadership over the centuries in seeking not only to ameliorate the effects of slavery but also to abolish the institution itself."]},{"heading":"Special Issues","content":["The fact that Paul does not directly call for Philemon to release Onesimus has troubled many people, and many individuals have criticized the Bible for allowing slavery. However, as noted in the History of Interpretation section above, it is clear that slavery was not a part of the original created order, so it would be impossible to argue that slavery was ever an inherently good thing. Furthermore, it is also important to keep in mind that slavery as practiced in biblical times was very different than the chattel slavery practiced in the Western world until the nineteenth century. As an example, in both ancient Israel during the OT period and the Roman Empire during the NT period, slavery was not based on one’s race and slaves in both systems had the opportunity to purchase their freedom. While it would be a mistake to glorify ancient slavery, it is also necessary to remember that slavery in the ancient world was almost the only way to deal with impoverishment. When one could not take care of oneself and one’s family, selling oneself into slavery could mean the difference between life and death. In other words, ancient slavery enabled people to escape starvation in the absence of charitable or government assistance.","God revealed Himself to people trapped in personal sin as well as the sinful structures that exist in a fallen world. Slavery was key to the ancient economic system and kept many people from going hungry. Had the apostles and prophets called for its immediate abolition, things would have been made much worse not only for the slaves but also for the entire society. People would have starved and economic collapse and chaos would have ensued. The most loving thing that could have been done was the regulation of slavery and the revelation of principles that over time would lead to its abolishment without making life much worse for those who had no other option for survival except slavery . That is exactly what we find in Scripture—a transformation of the master-slave relationship that leads inevitably to the end of slavery wherever the gospel is truly embraced and its implications for all of society are lived out."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"INTRODUCTORY GREETINGS","reference":"VV. 1–3"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"THANKSGIVING","reference":"VV. 4–7"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"PAUL’S REQUEST FOR ONESIMUS","reference":"VV. 8–21"},{"level":1,"marker":"IV","text":"INTENDED VISIT","reference":"VV. 21, 22"},{"level":1,"marker":"V","text":"CLOSING GREETINGS AND BLESSING","reference":"VV. 23–25"}]}]}
