{"sections":[{"heading":"Title","content":["The title “Psalms” comes from the Greek and Latin tradition. The Septuagint (the Greek translation of the Old Testament) uses the word Psalmos, and the Latin Vulgate translation, which was the Bible the church used during the Middle Ages, uses the word Psalmus. Both of these terms mean “a song sung to the accompaniment of stringed instruments.” The New Testament uses psalmos as well (Luke 20:42; 24:44; Acts 1:20). The corresponding Hb. word mizmor occurs frequently in the title of various psalms (e.g., Ps. 3). The Hebrew title, however, is “Praises,” a translation of the Hb. word tehillah (“praise”), and this title captures the overarching movement in the book from lamentation and suffering at the beginning to praise and glory at the end."]},{"heading":"Author","content":["Many of the psalms begin with a title linking the psalm with a particular individual or group, using a Hb. preposition that could possibly indicate dedication (“to David”), subject matter (“about David”), or authorship (“by David”). However, one of the few psalm titles with expanded content (Ps. 18) leaves little doubt that the title intends to identify the composer of the psalm. David is by far the most frequently cited author, most of his psalms being in the first two books (see Structure), though there is a small collection of psalms by him at the very end (Pss. 138–145). The tradition that associates David with singing and psalm composition is so strong (1 Sam. 16:14–23; 2 Sam. 1:17–27; 2 Sam. 22; 2 Sam. 23:1; 1 Chr. 6:31; 15:16; 16:7; Ps. 18; Amos 6:5; Matt. 22:43; Acts 1:16) that there is little doubt that David wrote many or all of the psalms that bear his name.","Other authors appear in psalm titles: Moses (Ps. 90), Solomon (Pss. 72; 127), the sons of Korah (Pss. 42–49; 84; 85; 87; 88), Asaph (Pss. 50; 73–83), and Ethan the Ezrahite (Ps. 89). A number of psalms have no designated author (e.g., Pss. 1; 71)."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["The titles of the psalms show that they were composed by individuals in response to particular corporate or individual experiences. The dates and occasions of the psalms (see the introductory paragraphs to the psalms in the notes) range from the time of Moses (Ps. 90), to the experiences of David (Ps. 51), to the time after the Babylonian exile (Ps. 126), a span of approximately one thousand years. Still, the psalms that originated in specific situations and were collected for use in private devotion or public worship were never so time-bound that they could not be used in a variety of new situations. Forming the collection as a whole took several centuries, and was not completed until sometime after the exile in Babylon. The entire collection is also known as the Psalter."]},{"heading":"Genre","content":["The broadest genre consideration is that the book of Psalms is poetry, not prose. For additional discussion of the poetic character of Psalms, see the Introduction to Hebrew Poetry.","Distinguishing characteristics allow the individual psalms to be assigned to literary categories for the purpose of study. These categories are not to be seen as mutually exclusive but as perspectives from which to gain insight into the various psalms. The following are the literary categories commonly used in the book of Psalms.","1. Hymns. Hymns were composed for times when all is well. Hymns are easily recognized by their exuberant praise of the Lord, and they typically praise the Lord for who He is as the Creator (e.g., Ps. 104) and Redeemer (e.g., Ps. 105). Hymns usually have three sections: a call to praise God, the praise proper, and a concluding affirmation of faith or renewed call to praise. Psalm 103 is a good example of this structure: Call to Praise (vv. 1, 2), Praise (vv. 3–19), and Call to Praise (vv. 20–22). For other examples of hymns, see Pss. 8; 19; 29; 33; 65; 67; 68; 93; 96; 98; 100; 111; 113; 114; 117; 135; 145; 146; 147; 148; 149; 150.","2. Laments. Laments were composed for when all is not well, and thus express emotions experienced in times of great sorrow or loss. In a lament, the psalmist opens his heart honestly to God, a heart filled with sadness, loneliness, perplexity, grief, abandonment, fear, or anger. With few exceptions (Pss. 44; 88) the laments turn to the Lord with confidence at the end. Laments usually have two sections: the plea for help followed by confidence or praise. Psalm 6 is a fine example: Plea for Help (vv. 1–7) and Confidence in Being Delivered (vv. 8, 9). For other examples, see Pss. 3; 5; 7; 13; 17; 22; 25; 26; 27; 28; 38; 39; 42; 43; 51; 54; 55; 56; 57; 59; 61; 63; 64; 69; 70; 71; 74; 79; 80; 83; 86; 89; 102; 109; 120; 130; 140; 141; 142; 143.","3. Thanksgiving Psalms. Psalms of thanksgiving are like hymns in that they focus on the praise of God. The difference is that the hymns focus on what God has done in the distant past, in creation or in redemptive history, while the psalms of thanksgiving focus on what God has done in the recent, personal history of the psalmist. In particular, psalms of thanksgiving were written to celebrate those times when the Lord answered a prayer of lament. Like the hymns, the thanksgiving psalms usually have three sections: an opening intention to give thanks, a recollection of trouble (often mirroring the structure and language of the lament), and a concluding renewal of thanksgiving. Psalm 116 is probably the most personal example: Thanksgiving and Love (vv. 1–3), Recollection of Trouble (vv. 3–11), and Thanksgiving and Praise (vv. 12–19). For other examples, see Pss. 18; 30; 34; 40; 41; 66; 92; 118; 124; 138.","4. Psalms of Confidence (or Trust). In between the laments and the psalms of thanksgiving are the psalms of confidence. There is typically some sort of trouble in view in these psalms, but the anguish is not as intense as in the laments, and the psalmist is not yet completely out of trouble. The dominant mood of these psalms is confidence that the Lord will deliver the psalmist. Unlike the first three genres, the psalms of confidence apparently have no common structure. For examples, see Pss. 16; 23; 27; 62; 73; 91; 115; 121; 125; 131.","5. Kingship Psalms. Since God, the King of the universe, is the subject of many psalms and since David, the human king, is the subject of many other psalms, kingship is an important concept in the Psalter (see Characteristics and Primary Themes). A few psalms, however, focus so intensely on divine kingship (Ps. 47) or on human kingship (Ps. 45) that they stand out as a separate genre. Lacking any formal structure, the kingship psalms are held together by themes such as creation, redemption, judgment, supremacy over idols, and universal care. For examples of divine kingship psalms, see Pss. 24; 29; 47; 48; 93; 95; 96; 97; 98; 99; 145; and for examples of human kingship psalms, see Pss. 2; 20; 21; 45; 61; 63; 72.","6. Wisdom Psalms. Some psalms are at home in the world of Proverbs, Job, and Ecclesiastes. There is a certain diction that these psalms share with the other wisdom books: pronouncements of blessing, numerical sayings, “better than” sayings, alphabetic structuring, and admonitions. The wisdom psalms also make use of themes found in the Wisdom Literature: the way of the righteous and the way of the wicked, the contrast between the wise and the foolish, practical advice, retribution, and the fear of the Lord. The convergence of wisdom’s diction and wisdom’s themes suffices to place certain psalms in this category. For examples, see Pss. 1; 19; 32; 34; 37; 49; 73; 112; 119; 128."]},{"heading":"Literary Features","content":["The psalms are arranged in five books. The end of each book is marked by doxology (Pss. 1–41; 42–72; 73–89; 90–106; 107–150). Jewish tradition holds that the number five was chosen to match the five books of Moses, and this is certainly the case. Both the five books of Moses and the five books of the Psalms are torah (instruction) from the Lord (Ps. 1:2).","Book 1 begins with the inauguration of the Davidic covenant (Ps. 2) and ends with the promises of Ps. 2 coming to realization (Ps. 41). Book 2 ends with the covenant of kingship being transferred to Solomon (Ps. 72), who is a type of the blessed man of Ps. 1 (see the imagery in Ps. 72:5–7) and a type of the Messianic King of Ps. 2 (see the language in Ps. 72:8–11). Book 3 then ends on an ominous note. The first psalm of the section complains that the righteous suffer. The last psalm of the section laments that the Davidic covenant seems to have failed, with the king’s crown rolling in the dust (Ps. 89). Ps. 88 is the only psalm without praise. The remaining books answer the question burning in the hearts and minds of the postexilic community: “How do we live in the absence of the Davidic king?” Book 4 replies that we live by faith that the Lord is still King in spite of evidence to the contrary. Within this book, Pss. 93–99, called “enthronement psalms,” look to God’s reign on earth. Book 5 replies that we live with an obedience (Ps. 119) that focuses on the true worship of God (Ps. 145–150). It begins by thanking God for bringing Israel back from the exile, and includes psalms holding up David as a model for piety (138–145), as well as psalms predicting the reign of the Messiah (110)."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["Psalms 1 and 2 introduce us to the main themes of the book of Psalms: the life of holiness and happiness (Ps. 1) under the reign of the divine King and His Messiah (Ps. 2).","Psalm 1 gives us the purpose of the book of Psalms: to provide a manual for meditating on the instruction of the Lord, so that we can experience the “blessed” life, a life of abundant holiness and happiness. Psalm 2 gives us the overarching message of the book of Psalms: the Divine King reigns through His Messiah, who comes from the line of David. In fact, concerns related to the Davidic king are so prevalent in the Psalter that the book of Psalms in many ways functions as the hymnbook of the king. In the ancient Near East, the king was a key figure in worship, leading the people in the praise and worship of their deities. The king of Israel, of course, stands out among the other kings in the region as a worshiper of the only true God, the representative of God’s people before the divine throne. Thus, the book of Psalms has special importance for the sons of David and, preeminently, David’s greatest son—the Messiah. It is no accident, therefore, that the New Testament authors extensively quote from the book of Psalms, even indicating that they belong on the lips of Jesus in a special way (e.g., Heb. 2:10–13; 10:5–7).","Since the Davidic king had a key role in worship, we also see that the book of Psalms is designed specifically for liturgical use. Many of them, in fact, call on the people of God to worship the Lord (e.g., Pss. 95:6; 132:7). Consequently, the psalms have been treasured by God’s people for use in His worship down through the centuries."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["Just as the Psalter was formed during the entire period of the Old Testament, so the theology of the psalms is as large as the Old Testament. Martin Luther called the Psalms “a little Bible, and the summary of the Old Testament.” The overarching presentation of God in the book of Psalms is God as King. Two corollaries to God as King in the Psalms are God as Creator and God as Redeemer. God’s transcendence and his immanence, along with virtually all of his other attributes, run like golden threads through the entire Psalter.","Therefore, the book of Psalms gives us one of the most complete and comprehensive revelations of the character of God in the entire Bible. If we want to know who God is, what He has done, and how we should respond to Him, the book of Psalms is one of the best places to start."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["The book of Psalms was in all likelihood completed during the postexilic era and was compiled among other reasons to answer the question: “How do we live in the absence of the Davidic King?” (see Literary Features). As such, the book of Psalms served to give hope to God’s people that the Messiah would one day come, a hope that is realized finally in Christ and the consummation of His reign, as revealed in the New Testament. As we await the return of Christ, believers today are somewhat like believers who are seeking to understand how we are to live in the physical absence of the Davidic king, though we know that even now, Christ rules as the King of kings by His Spirit in the church and over all creation as the Creator and Lord of all. Like the Jews before the incarnation, we await the coming of the Messiah, only this time we are looking for His second coming, and the book of Psalms still serves to encourage that hope."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["Christian readers of the Psalms appreciate the relationship these ancient songs have to Jesus Christ. Jesus told His disciples after the resurrection that “everything written about me in the Law of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must be fulfilled” (Luke 24:44). The Old Testament, including the Psalms, looked forward to Christ’s coming, His suffering, and His glorification. Jesus and the New Testament writers use the Psalms to express His suffering (Matt. 27:46) and His glorification (Matt. 22:41–46), in keeping with the overarching movement of the Psalter (see Title). Often, individual psalms begin with the reflection of David on his life or on events in his life and them move to David’s greatest son, the Messiah to come, such as Pss. 2 and 110. Psalm 23 points the reader directly to Christ, the Good Shepherd who gave His life for His sheep (cf. John 10:11–18).","In addition, since Jesus is Lord of the covenant, the Psalms are sung to Him, and since Jesus is Servant of the covenant, the psalms are sung by Him. Jesus is therefore above us as the One to whom we sing, and Jesus is beside us as the One who sings with us in all of life’s experiences (Heb. 2:12)."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["Traditionally, a psalm was interpreted in its presumed historical context from the books of Samuel and Kings. One problem with this approach is that only fourteen psalms contain historical information in the title. A second problem is that some of the historical information in the titles is problematic (see Special Issues). So this approach is only partially helpful. At the end of the nineteenth century, there was a move to study a given psalm in the context of other psalms from the same genre. This approach remains an integral part of interpreting the book of Psalms to this day. In the mid-1980s, the book of Psalms began to be studied not as a random collection of poems but as a purposely arranged collection. This means that a given psalm is to be interpreted in the context of the surrounding psalms as well as in the context of its genre."]},{"heading":"Special Issues","content":["The Curses of the Psalms. Some psalms, called imprecatory psalms, cry out not only for the righteous to be vindicated, but also for God to punish the wicked (e.g., Ps. 69:22–28). Such prayers reflect the calling of Israel to holy war as God’s instruments of judgment. With the coming of Christ to bear God’s judgment, the warfare of God’s people continues, now primarily directed against “spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places” (Eph. 6:12). In their warfare, Christians are commanded to bless their personal enemies, overcoming evil with good (Rom. 12:17–21). Theologians are divided over whether there might be circumstances under which Christians may pray the imprecatory psalms against the church’s enemies in the new covenant era. If there is a place for such prayers, two things must be kept in mind: First, as under the old covenant, the imprecatory psalms are not for use against just any enemy who causes problems for God’s people; rather, they are for enemies who are flagrantly and impenitently evil in their actions against Christ’s church. Second, in praying imprecatory psalms, space must always be allowed for the Lord to answer them by redeeming our enemies through judgment, just as He has done for us. Christ bore the imprecations that were rightly directed at us as the enemies of God, and so we passed through judgment in Him unto eternal life. God may do the same for our enemies, uniting them to Christ so that He bears the imprecations in their place, granting them the gift of eternal life (cf. Gal. 3:10–14).","Titles. Scholars have long debated whether the titles of the various psalms were written by the authors of the psalms themselves or if they are later additions. The titles are either an original part of the psalms or they come from early tradition, and were added before the final canonical form of the book was completed before the Septuagint translation of 200 B.C. Although the debate continues, evidence such as the appearance of the same information in the title to Psalm 18 and in 2 Samuel 22:1 means that the titles should be taken as original to the psalms and thus contain critical information about their original setting. In other words, the life settings described in the psalm titles are accurate and reflect the historical circumstances under which they were written. The titles contain five types of information:","1. Authorship. See the discussion at Author above.","2. Historical Background. Fourteen psalms have historical information in the title (Pss. 3; 7; 18; 30; 34; 51; 52; 54; 56; 57; 59; 60; 63; 142). There are a some places where it is either hard to match the content of the title with the content of the psalm (e.g., Ps. 30) or to match the content of the title and the psalm with the historical narrative (e.g., Ps. 3 and 2 Sam. 18:5). While the historical titles may give us an indication of the origin of a psalm, they are of limited help in interpretation; see History of Interpretation above.","3. Genre. A number of the terms in the titles classify the psalms into ancient genres. Some are frequent, e.g, mizmor (“psalm”) and shir (“song”), while others are rare. It is difficult, however, to know the precise meaning of the terms used, and some psalms are both a mizmor and a shir (Pss. 30; 66; 67; 68; 75; 83; 87; 88). In contemporary discussions, genre is discerned from the structure and content of the psalms and not from the titles.","4. Musical Direction. Some musical notes refer to instruments, e.g., “flutes” (Ps. 5) and “stringed instruments” (Ps. 6). The meaning of other musical notes is obscure, which is why translators transcribe the Hebrew terms, e.g., “Sheminith” (Ps. 6) and “Shiggaion” (Ps. 7); the same holds true for the ubiquitous “selah” (Ps. 3:2).","5. Instructions. Occasionally, the titles indicate how the psalms were used in formal worship. Of these, the best known are the “Songs of Ascents.”"]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"BOOK I, PSALMS 1–41","reference":""},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"BOOK II, PSALMS 42–72","reference":""},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"BOOK III, PSALMS 73–89","reference":""},{"level":1,"marker":"IV","text":"BOOK IV, PSALMS 90–106","reference":""},{"level":1,"marker":"V","text":"BOOK V, PSALMS 107–150","reference":""}]}]}
