{"sections":[{"heading":"Title","content":["The title of the book in Hebrew is best translated “Song of Songs,” a construction that expresses the superlative (cf. “Lord of lords”). In other words, this is “The Very Best Song.” In the English tradition, the book goes by a few different names. One is “Canticles,” a shortened, anglicized form of the Latin title, Canticum Canticorum, which is an exact translation of the Hebrew title. Another is “The Song of Solomon,” based on a presumed Solomonic connection."]},{"heading":"Author","content":["According to Song 1:1, the Song of Songs “is Solomon’s.” The phrase “is Solomon’s” can be translated as “by Solomon” (as its author), “for Solomon” (as the person to whom it is dedicated), or “associated with Solomon” (as one of Israel’s renowned composers; see 1 Kin. 4:32). The traditional view of both Jews and Christians is that Solomon authored this book."]},{"heading":"Date and Occasion","content":["If the Song was written “by Solomon,” it was composed in the mid-tenth century B.C. If the Song was “dedicated to Solomon,” this might also favor a very early date. Some have taken the reference to Tirzah in Song 6:4 to indicate an early date, either when Tirzah was the capital of the northern ten tribes (c. 900 B.C.) or even earlier during Solomon’s reign and before hostility arose between Israel and Judah (c. 950 B.C.). Certainty is not possible on this issue, since Tirzah probably means something like “pleasant” or “beautiful,” thus explaining the reference to this particular city. If the Song is “associated with Solomon,” no insight is gained for dating the book.","While all of Scripture was written for all times and all places, some books have a more timeless feel than others, and the Song is one such book. Unlike the books of Kings, which were originally written to the exilic community in Babylon, or the books of Chronicles, which were originally written to the postexilic community in Judea, the Song gives no evidence of a narrow occasion for its composition. No specific audience seems to be in view."]},{"heading":"Genre","content":["Except for the opening verse, the Song is poetry. In a sense, the entire book is one poem, hence the title “The Song [singular] of Songs [plural].” But the Song is also a collection of smaller poems. The boundaries of these individual poems are not always clear, as is obvious from consulting different translations or contemporary commentaries.","There are several questions that must be answered with regard to the genre of the Song. The first question: Is the Song an allegory or is it love poetry? In both Jewish and Christian history, the allegorical approach to interpreting the Song has predominated. The majority of contemporary commentators, however, both Jewish and Christian, favor a literal reading of the book as love poetry, and this is the position taken here. See History of Interpretation.","The second question: Is the Song to be read as a drama or simply as an anthology of love poems? Some read the Song as a drama with two characters, the Shulammite woman and the king/shepherd. Others read the Song as a drama with at least three characters—the Shulammite woman, the shepherd, and the king—and a plot centering on the question as to whether the Shulammite woman will end up with her true love, the shepherd, or with the man in power, the king. (In this view, the Song has a similar plot to other stories both ancient and modern.) While the dramatic reading is possible, commentators who take that position have been unable to reach unanimity regarding the number of characters or the flow of the plot. Thus, it seems we are on safer ground in reading the Song as an anthology.","The third question: Is the anthology a loose connection of poems or one that is highly structured? On one end of the spectrum of opinion, the Song is seen as a loose connection of poems held together by common themes and images. On the other end, the Song is seen as a concentric structure of twenty-eight parts. The evidence in the text seems to lead us away from both extremes and to the conclusion that the Song is a moderately structured anthology of love poetry with some movement from the beginning to the end, movement that falls short of full plot development."]},{"heading":"Literary Features","content":["There is a key repetition that seems to play a role in the macro-structure of the book: “I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem” (2:7; 3:5; 5:8; 8:4). This repetition is similar to the repetition of “these are the generations of” in the book of Genesis, a repetition that plays a key role in the structure of Genesis. Of interest is the fact that in both books, the repetitions are exact except for one modified text in each book (Gen. 5:1; Song 5:8). Given this fourfold repetition in the Song, it seems that the book can be divided into six sections: Introduction (1:1); Group One (1:2–2:7); Group Two (2:8–3:5); Group Three (3:6–5:8); Group Four (5:9–8:4); and Conclusion (8:5–14). Further evidence for this macro-structure is found in the repetition of the line, “His left hand is under my head, and his right hand embraces me!” This line occurs twice, in 2:6 and 8:3, immediately preceding the first and fourth occurrences of the refrain.","While the flow of thought may fall short of full plot development, there does appear to be some movement in the groups of poems. After the superscription (1:1), there is an emphasis in the first group on the woman’s desire for her lover (1:2–2:7). This is followed by the second group, which has an emphasis on the approach of her lover (2:8–3:5). The poems in the third group focus on her loss of her lover (3:6–5:8), while the fourth group brings us to the return of her lover (5:9–8:4). This quasi-story line comes to its consummation in 8:5–14."]},{"heading":"Characteristics and Primary Themes","content":["The overarching theme of the Song is human love and sex. There are, however, three subthemes. The first is delight, and this subtheme is highlighted in 1:2–2:7 and 3:6–5:8. Both the man and the woman express unabashed delight in each other: “Behold, you are beautiful, my love” (1:15); “Behold, you are beautiful, my beloved” (1:16). The Song contains many images that articulate this delight, so any study of the Song must include the unpacking of these images.","The second subtheme is disappointment, and this is the focus of 3:6–5:8. The woman realizes that there are risks in love, but she is willing to take those risks. Regrettably, taking these risks sometimes results in disappointment. Such disappointment is expressed most poignantly in 5:6: “I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had turned and gone.”","In spite of the disappointments experienced in love, there is a third subtheme—desire—that finds special articulation in the final group of poems (8:5–14). “Love is strong as death” (8:6); “Many waters cannot quench love” (8:7). So, the Song ends with an expression of deep desire that overcomes the disappointments, “Make haste, my beloved, and be like a gazelle or young stag on the mountains of spices” (8:14)."]},{"heading":"Theology","content":["The Song is about more than love and sex—it is about love and sex redeemed. The paradisiacal imagery reminds us of the beginning, before the fall, when human love was everything God intended it to be and nothing God did not intend it to be. The themes of delight and desire in this book show us that human love and sex are not inherently evil, but still contain a great deal of the beauty intended by God in the beginning. This contributes to a full-orbed biblical sexual ethic that embraces the goodness of the sexual relationship between man and woman when it is expressed in the appropriate context—the biblical covenant of marriage wherein husband and wife become one flesh (Gen. 2:18–25). Historically, many interpreters have been somewhat embarrassed by the sensual imagery of the Song, largely due to assumptions left over from the Greek philosophers who viewed the body and physical pleasure as evils, things to be escaped or avoided for the good of the soul. But Scripture does not teach that the spirit is good and the body is bad; rather, both the physical and the spiritual are part of the Lord’s good creation. God made a world that was originally “very good,” commanding human beings to procreate and fill it (Gen. 1:26–31). Sex within the context of marriage is therefore good and holy, a gift of God for spousal enjoyment and the furthering of physical, spiritual, and emotional intimacy between husband and wife. Originally, the Song was written to convey these themes, and although it does point us ultimately to Christ, we need not be afraid to read the Song as an expression and affirmation of the goodness of love and sex within marriage."]},{"heading":"In the Larger Story of the Bible","content":["The garden imagery in the Song (see explicit references in 4:12, 15, 16; 5:1; 6:2; 8:3) is intended to remind us of the garden of Eden, where the first man and woman “were both naked and were not ashamed” (Gen. 2:25). In that way, the Song points us back to the beginning, when human beings were in perfect relationship with God and with one another. It reminds us that love, sex, and marriage were originally good gifts and in many ways remain good gifts; therefore, they can be redeemed from the negativity that so often surrounds them as we live in harmony with the Lord’s design for them. The redemption and restoration of these relationships can be realized more and more in this life as we anticipate the consummation of all things in which everything will be fully restored. This consummation has been guaranteed by the perfect Husband, the One who has redeemed His bride by loving her and giving Himself for her (Eph. 5:22–33).","The theme of disappointment in the Song confronts us with the fact that human love, like every other dimension of life, has been adversely affected by the fall (cf. Gen. 3:16–19). In a fallen world, human love is no longer everything that God intended it to be. This points us forward to the hope of redemption, eliciting in us a longing for the restoration of all of our relationships and the renewal of creation that the Prophets reveal as the consummation of the Lord’s plan for the cosmos (Is. 65:17–25; Dan. 12:1, 2; cf. Rom. 8:18–25). This restoration and consummation, the Prophets explain, will occur only through the work of the Messiah (Is. 53; Amos 9:11, 12)."]},{"heading":"Christ in This Book","content":["As noted, the Song creates within the reader a hope for the fullness of relationship that God intended for men and women in the garden. Ultimately, then, Christian interpreters throughout history have not been entirely wrong in reading the work as a revelation of Christ. Only Christ can fully satisfy the longings of human beings for intimacy, for He alone is the One who provides rivers of living water that make it so we are never thirsty again (John 4:13, 14; 7:37, 38). Even the best marriages provide occasions for disappointment, as the Song recognizes (3:6–5:8). In that way, the Song reminds us that Christ is the only perfect Spouse. Only He can meet all of our needs.","While the allegorical interpretation of the Song is off target, it is nonetheless the case that the Song is illustrative of the love of Christ for His church. Given the consistent use in both Testaments of marriage as an image for God’s relationship with His people (cf. Ezek. 16; Hos. 1–3; Eph. 5:21–33), it would seem odd for the Song not to give us a glimpse of that bond. God designed marriage to mirror His relationship with us, so it seems natural that God inspired the Song to mirror that relationship as well. While avoiding the excesses of the allegorical approach to the Song, the reader is certainly invited to reflect on the Song’s themes as windows into our relationship with God."]},{"heading":"History of Interpretation","content":["As early as A.D. 100, we have evidence that Jewish interpreters felt discomfort with reading the Song literally. At that time, Rabbi Akiba stated that anyone who uses the book in such a literal fashion has no share in the life to come. Judaism has traditionally read the text as an allegory of redemptive history from Adam to the Messiah or as an allegory of God and the individual believer. Historically, Christian interpreters have followed suit, as exemplified in the writings of Hippolytus (c. 200), Origen (c. 250), Jerome (c. 400), and Bernard of Clairvaux (c. 1135). Many of the Protestant Reformers and the Puritans read the Song in this way as well. A shift in interpretation began to take place in the nineteenth century, and Jewish and Christian interpreters since the twentieth century have almost unanimously agreed that the Song is to be read not as an allegory but as love poetry. There are no doubt numerous reasons for this shift in interpretation, but two are particularly clear. One is rooted in the Protestant Reformation’s return to studying the Bible in the original languages and with an essentially historical-grammatical hermeneutic. There is nothing in the text itself that would lead one to read it allegorically; the difference in this regard between the Song and The Pilgrim’s Progress, for example, is obvious. The other reason for this change in interpretation is rooted in the rise of modern archaeology in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and discoveries of love poetry akin to the Song from the ancient Near East."]},{"heading":"Outline","content":[{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"","reference":"1:1"},{"level":1,"marker":"I","text":"THE WOMAN’S DESIRE FOR HER LOVER","reference":"1:2–2:7"},{"level":1,"marker":"II","text":"THE APPROACH OF HER LOVER","reference":"2:8–3:5"},{"level":1,"marker":"III","text":"THE LOSS OF HER LOVER","reference":"3:6–5:8"},{"level":1,"marker":"IV","text":"THE REUNION OF THE LOVERS (5:9–8:4) CONSUMMATION","reference":"8:5–14"}]}]}
