[{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:1","verse_quote":"dare go to law before the unrighteous.","note":"With this verse, Paul appears to change the topic from the evils of immorality to the problem of lawsuits among Christians. It is important, however, to notice the connection. In the first place, the topic of immorality has not been abandoned, but will recur in v. 9 and vv. 12–20. Second, the failings of the Corin­thians with regard to lawsuits are an expression of the problem already discussed in ch. 5, namely, a weak doctrine of the church. Just as Christians are not responsible to regulate the lives of non-Christians, so non-Christians have no power to discipline in the church. If the Corinthians understood the relation between the Israelite community and the Christian fellowship (5:12, 13 note), they would realize it was absurd for believers to go outside the church to solve their disputes. Who could imagine a pagan Gentile settling disputes among Israelites in the wilderness? This text does not, however, negate the legitimate role of civil authorities to judge matters that God has put under them. See theological note “Civil Government” on p. 2004."},{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:2–5","verse_quote":"","note":"The absurdity of the situation in Corinth becomes clearer when one recognizes that, in the consummation of history (but not before; 5:12, 13), Christians will participate with Christ in judging not only unbelievers but also wicked angels. Even the least qualified among the Corinthians, since he has received God’s Spirit and wisdom (2:14–16), is in a better position than an unbeliever to arbitrate disputes in the church."},{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:7","verse_quote":"Why not rather suffer wrong.","note":"This remarkable question makes obvious how critical is the principle of community for the apostle. The point is not that Christians should be encouraged to acquiesce passively to abuse from others. After all, cheating and injustice should not even exist within the Christian community. That such injustices do exist, and are indeed performed by Christians against one another, demonstrates how far the Corinthians have fallen. Nevertheless, if the Corinthians understood the serious implications of all the improprieties in their church, and if they appreciated the qualities that should characterize believers (cf. 13:4–7), they would much sooner bear injustice than bring disgrace upon the Christian community by publicly exposing their conflicts in the civil courts."},{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:9","verse_quote":"the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God.","note":"See theological note “Antinomianism” on p. 2272. That the things of this world are incompatible with the kingdom of God is a recurring principle in Scripture (15:50; Gal. 5:21). The question arises whether anyone at all can be saved, since none is sinless. Paul’s answer is twofold: on the one hand, God delights in justifying the wicked (Rom. 4:5); on the other hand, those whom God justifies (declares righteous because of Christ’s death) He also sanctifies (leads into a holy way of life; Rom. 6:1–4). Paul charitably regards the Corinthians in terms of their profession as believers, justified and sanctified (v. 11 note), and therefore considers their present misbehavior as an anomaly that can be corrected. But it must be corrected. Persistence in wickedness would be an indication that their possession of faith is false and that they have no true place in the kingdom."},{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:11","verse_quote":"But you were washed.","note":"See notes on 1:2; 5:7; theological note “The Holy Spirit as Sanctifier” on p. 2023. The saving work of God’s Spirit through Jesus’ name includes not only legal vindication (“justified”) but also subjective purification and transformation (“sanctified”)."},{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:12, 13","verse_quote":"","note":"Paul may be quoting sayings, probably common in Corinth, that were used to excuse immoral behavior (note the repetition, again with qualifying corrections, at 10:23). The apostle’s corrective rejoinders suggest that, even if there is an element of truth in these slogans, the Corinthians have perverted it. Indeed, his qualifications have the effect of denying the very point of the sayings, and he ends by emphasizing the noble purpose for which God has given us bodies. Freedom in Christ is deployed in what is “helpful” to others, and does not lead us into being “dominated” by sinful desires, a senseless return to enslavement.\n\n**Food is meant for the stomach and the stomach for food.** Another Corinthian slogan, this may assume a parallel between hunger for food and the sexual drive as a pretext for justifying any form of sexual indulgence as natural and irresistible. Paul will not permit such trivializing of sexuality, nor of the physical body itself. Its appointed end, for Christians, is not destruction in the grave but resurrection by God’s power to enjoy eternal blessing in the new heaven and earth (15:20–23, 35–58; Rev. 21:1–8). Those who die before the return of Christ and the final resurrection enjoy a spiritual existence with Christ in heaven (2 Cor. 5:8; Phil. 1:21–23), and their spirits will be reunited with their bodies at the resurrection., 13"},{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:14","verse_quote":"will also raise us up.","note":"This reference to the resurrection is unexpected here, and probably reflects the connection between inadequate doctrine and deficient life. Many of the Corinthians appear to have mistakenly denied the future bodily resurrection, believing that Christians have been fully been brought out of this age and fully brought into the age to come (ch. 15; 15:35 note). This was an erroneous understanding of eschatology (the last things), in which the only resurrection that is to take place is a spiritual resurrection, which had already occurred. But just as Christ was physically raised from the dead, so will all believers be physically raised at the very end of time. With such a false doctrine, some of the Corinthians may have regarded sexual relationships as unnecessary because sexual relations belong to this present age (7:1–5). The same doctrine could yield the opposite view: since what is done with the physical body has no spiritual significance, even promiscuous sexual behavior is not wrong."},{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:15","verse_quote":"your bodies are members of Christ.","note":"The doctrine of the believer’s union with Christ is one of the most fundamental teachings of the apostle. What is significant about this verse is that it represents that union as involving the whole person, including the physical body (Rom. 12:1). The Corinthians were wrong in thinking that sexual union with a prostitute, just because it was physical, did not affect their relationship with Christ."},{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:16, 17","verse_quote":"one body with her ... one spirit with him.","note":"Paul assumes the truth of Gen. 2:24 (see Eph. 5:31), that sexual intercourse effects a profound interpersonal union that is more than merely physical. The contrast is not that union with Christ is spiritual while union with a prostitute is physical; Paul has emphasized in v. 15 that union with Christ involves the body, a point developed in vv. 18–20. “One spirit” probably refers to the Holy Spirit (15:45 note). Through the Holy Spirit we (spirit and body) have become one with Christ, and this sublime union forbids our giving our bodies to prostitutes. If what Paul condemns here has to do with the prostitutes who served at the temple of the goddess Aphrodite, the religious implications of the Corinthians’ immorality are even more obvious (10:20)., 17"},{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:18","verse_quote":"outside the body.","note":"The meaning of this passage is disputed. There seem to be many sins that are against the body. Nevertheless, in Paul’s teaching, the physical union involved in sexual immorality has special consequences because it interferes with our Christian identity as people who have been united with Christ through the Holy Spirit. It is perhaps significant that Paul’s prohibition in this verse (“Flee from sexual immorality”) is expressed in the same way as the command against idolatry (10:14)."},{"chapter":"6","verse_ref":"6:19","verse_quote":"a temple of the Holy Spirit.","note":"Here Paul applies to the individual the concept of the church as the new temple where God dwells (3:16 note). While we must give due weight to this personal character of the Holy Spirit’s indwelling of individuals, the emphasis in Scripture is on the corporate identity of God’s people as a holy temple and a spiritual house (Eph. 2:19–22; 1 Pet. 2:4, 5)."}]
